UN Speech — Prime Minister of Albania

As we meet today, we confront yet another
year of complex crises and conflicts—as a
deeply divided world watches.

Our prospects for a more peaceful, just, and
equitable world are blurred today. Our times
are challenging.

A few days ago, we committed to the Pact of
the Future, a sound framework with a high level
of ambition and actionable deliverables. We
have made other similar major commitments in
the past. We have not always kept them. We
hope paid the price. This is yet another our
chance, one we take under pressure, to make a
difference for a more peaceful and prosperous
future.

Albania humbly joins this discussion after the
conclusion of its mission, for the first time, at
the UN Security Council.
Albania aimed to represent this community of
countries that stand together for those values
and principles that are non-negotiable, and we
sincerely hope to have met the expectations of
many.

Today more than ever, we need tolerance and
trust and an extended hand of friendship to
each other. Make no mistake. By tolerance, | do
not mean complacency.

Tolerance demands that we go beyond our
comfort zones and not merely “tolerate” but
tolerate respectfully, actively, and graciously, by
not simply accepting other views but constantly
engaging with the complexity of all our own
histories.

Tolerance for us Albanians is not merely the
passive acknowledgment and grudging
acceptance of someone’s diversity.
That form of tolerance—the tolerance that
Muslim and Christian Albanians expressed
during WWII towards the Jews by putting their
lives on the line against Evil—requires its own
partisan spirit.

It requires engaging with the one who is
different from us, accommodating
disagreements with respect, and continuing to
build bridges so that we can continue to
debate.

But it also requires that we continue to
challenge ourselves, by reflecting on the
possibility of our own biases and prejudices, by
reflecting on the arbitrariness and unilaterality
that we attribute to others, and by constantly
interrogating our own double moral standards.

It is with this trust in humanity and humanism
that Albania became a safe haven for the
people who escaped death after the fall of
Kabul under the Taliban, who were welcomed
and accepted by my country.
In the same spirit, we gave shelter to several
thousand Iranian refugees, whose lives were in
daily danger in Camp Liberty in Iraq, where they
were raided and killed by Tehran assassins.

We paid a dear price for being their hosts. The
Tehran totalitarian regime engaged in a large-
scale cyber-attack on Albania, which aimed to
bring the county to its knees by wiping out all
our digital infrastructure of public services.
They were brutal, but they failed.

We didn’t waver, and we will not waver in our
commitment to shelter those people in our
country for as long as it takes. Our hospitality
was and is not at all related to any political
stance against Iran, but only to a humanitarian
belief engraved in our spirit as a nation.
We recently extended a hand of help to our
neighbor and special friend, Italy, in an effort to
ease the difficulties that geography has
burdened on them with one of the most
challenging phenomena of our times:
immigration.

Meanwhile, instead of just talking, we tried to
act—without pretending to solve this huge
immigration problem in Europe, but on the
other hand, without just sitting around, and by
trying to build and add something constructive.

This attitude of solidarity, cooperation, and
good-neighborly relations is the lynchpin of our
policy in our region, the Western Balkans.

In our region, after more than a quarter of a
century, the deep wounds left by the violent
disintegration of the former Yugoslavia still
need to be healed, but we have also seen the
construction of peace, reflected above all by
the vision, unparalleled wisdom, and courage
that led to the creation of the EU.
All of us in the Western Balkans have tried for
over a decade to come together and meet to
talk about our challenges and plan our futures.

It is Albania’s firm belief that we need to look at
the past with the eyes of the future and not
look at the future with the eyes of the past.

Today, the peoples of the Balkans have a
moment of historical opportunity in a context
of historical danger in the wider Europe, i.e.,
Russian aggression against Ukraine.

| would say that the Western Balkans is in a
much better position today than before, but we
must work tirelessly among ourselves in the
region and, above all, with our partners, to
make the return to the past not just impossible,
but simply unimaginable.
In this context, our brotherly Republic of
Kosovo is an irreversible reality as a state
among the six countries of the Western
Balkans, with a clear European perspective and
an undisputed allegiance to the large
democratic community of nations.

Any artificially drawn parallels between Kosovo
and the occupied areas of Ukraine are meant to
distract and confuse whomever possible under
this roof and the international public opinion,
but they can never achieve to dilute the truth,
which is: Kosovo is now an intrinsic part of the
international reality, an aspiring member of the
Euro-Atlantic community, and must not be held
hostage by anyone with false pretensions and
excuses—starting with the group of EU member
states that still do not recognize Kosovo's
rightful place in every international
organization.

There is still a war waged on European soil!
In the third year of the unprovoked and
unjustified war of aggression of Russia against
Ukraine, we feel compelled to renew our call
for Russia to stop this war.

This is a war that neither Ukraine nor our
community of like-minded nations chose—a
catastrophe conceived by the decision of one
country and, indeed, one delusional dreamer of
an old imperial past.

Rewarding an aggressor who annexes the
territories of a sovereign country by disarming
the victim of aggression does not bring peace
but paves the way for more war.

All those who seek peace by stopping Ukraine
instead of stopping neo-imperialist Russia’s
aggression are wrong, and they should be
aware of a very simple truth: A peace that
defeats Ukraine would bring only further
aggression and turn our world into one ruled by
might, not right.
Yes, we seek peace too, and we want peace to
be made between Ukraine and Russia as soon
as possible. And of course, we would support
any peace attempt and format that would
include Russia around the table.

But we seek a just peace based on the Charter
of the United Nations, international law, and
the resolutions of the General Assembly of the
United Nations. A peace that cannot undermine
Ukraine and its rights.

Earlier this year in Tirana, we hosted the second
summit between Ukraine and Southeast Europe
and welcomed President Zelensky, a leader of a
resistance which is not simply a resistance to
brutal aggression against their homeland, but at
the same time a resistance for the very
existence of democracy and a just, rules-based
world.

Albania will continue to stand by Ukraine and
support it for as long as necessary and as long
as a lasting, just peace is achieved.
There is a war waging in Europe’s South-East
too.

Albania stands firm in its position that there is
no place for Hamas and its likes in the world we
want to live in, as we recognize the right of the
Palestinian people to have their own safe place
in this world, and their right to give birth and
raise their children in their own state.

Guaranteeing such a basic condition for millions
of Palestinians is much easier said than done,
just as it is much easier said than done for the
Jewish people to live in their land without
anyone questioning their right to exist.

We need to restore our moral compass in the
Middle East, yes, but there is no moral compass
that can relativize and, God forbid, normalize
terror and a terrorist organization like Hamas as
a part of the peace we all want between Israel
and Palestine.
Doing so would be like relativizing the scourge
of anti-Semitism and accepting to coexist with a
new vicious form of Nazism, which is the worst
thing that could have happened for so many
years to, first and foremost, the Palestinian
people themselves.

Nevertheless, it is not too difficult to state
loudly and strongly that so much violence and
destruction cannot be the long-term solution
for both Israel and Palestine.

We reaffirm our national support for a just and
comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, based on the two-state
solution.
12

Albania supports the international community’s
efforts related to this conflict, through dialogue
and negotiations leading to an independent
state solution, living in peace and good
neighborliness; a functional state of Palestine
and a secure state of Israel, which, instead of
being lectured from afar, should be
supported—with no “yes, buts” —in its fight
against terror, while still more than a hundred
innocent people are being kept hostages in
hellish holes under the face of the earth by the
butchers of October 7th last year.

The rule of law stands at the heart of one of the
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030
Agenda, a goal which plays the role of the
enabler and accelerator of all the other
Sustainable Development Goals.
Its importance stands on the promise of
achieving more inclusive, just, and peaceful
societies. Without strong institutions, access to
justice, and respect for human rights, progress
on other goals such as ending poverty, ensuring
food security, and promoting health and well-
being will be limited.

Albania is living proof of the radical
transformation of good governance practices
and mindset. Our public services are now over
95% paperless, and the digitalization of access
and services has curbed corruption, informality,
and mistrust in institutions.

With its unprecedented justice reform, Albania
has invested tremendously over the last few
years in achieving SDG 16 as a crucial tool for
achieving a sustainable future, for social
progress, economic prosperity, environmental
sustainability, and justice.
14

But the struggle for just and fair institutions and
good governance is not one that can be won
within a year, through one reform, or during a
single decade. On the contrary, it is a perpetual
effort to transform domestically over a
generation—from the highest level of policy-
making to the most effective practices of
providing access to citizens at all levels and
instances of government.

We are committed to playing our part and
collaborating with the international community
to ensure the successful realization of our
Albania 2030 Agenda.

Building upon the ongoing work during our
previous mandate as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, we will continue to
work with like-minded countries to improve the
governance and institutional efficiency of the
UN, as well as multilateralism and respect for
human rights.
As a member of the Human Rights Council,
Albania is committed to the universal principles
of human rights and dignity, in a world where
every human being can realize their full
potential and live with dignity and respect.

A dear daughter of the Albanians, Saint Mother
Teresa, once said: “I alone cannot change the
world, but | can cast a stone across the waters
to create many ripples.”

No better saying can mirror today’s need to
work together on what is clearly the substance

of multilateralism.

Thank you.
