Address by H.E. Nikol Pashinyan, the Prime Minister of the Republic of
Armenia, at the General Debate of the 79th Session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations
New York, 26 September 2024

Mr. President,

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

This is my fourth speech at the UN General Assembly and
this speech will be significantly different from the previous
ones. The key messages of my previous speeches were about
the deadlock in achieving peace between Armenia and
Azerbaijan, but today I want to say that Peace between
Armenia and Azerbaijan not only is possible, but is within

reach.

Why do I think so? For a few specific reasons. Quite
recently, on August 30, Armenia and Azerbaijan signed the
Regulation on the Joint Activity of the Commissions on

Delimitation of the state border between the two countries.

This is the first bilateral legal document signed between the

parties. But what is more important with that document,
Armenia and Azerbaijan agreed to set the 1991 Alma Ata
Declaration as the basic principle of border delimitation

between the two countries and will be guided by it.

This means that Armenia and Azerbaijan de jure reconfirm
the principle of recognizing each other's territorial integrity
and inviolability of borders that existed during the Soviet
Union, which is a fundamental factor for establishing peace.
Now it is de jure reconfirmed that the two countries have no

territorial claims on each other.

What we have to do now is to take the next step and sign the
Agreement on Establishment of Peace and Inter-State
Relations between the Republic of Armenia and the
Republic of Azerbaijan. The President of Azerbaijan and I
have stated many times that at least 80 percent of the

mentioned Agreement has been agreed upon.

Now, to seize this historic opportunity and to avoid the risk
of reaching a deadlock, Armenia proposes to take what has
already been agreed in the draft Agreement, sign it, have a

peace Agreement between Armenia and Azerbaijan and

2
then go on with negotiations on pending issues. We are

ready to do this right now.

Why do we propose this? Because there is no precedent of a
peace agreement or any agreement that would regulate and
solve everything. It is practically not possible. After signing
any agreement, two countries may always need to conclude
new agreements and make new arrangements for this very

reason.

No matter how comprehensive any agreement, many

important issues need to be further addressed.

And in the case of Armenia and Azerbaijan, the agreed
articles of the draft Peace Agreement actually contain
provisions on peace, on not having territorial claims on each
other and not putting forward such claims in the future,
provisions on establishing diplomatic relations and a joint
commission to oversee the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, a provision on not interfering in each other's
internal affairs, not using force and threat of force, and other

important provisions.
Signing the Peace Agreement with the already agreed
articles, will significantly facilitate the resolution of the non-
agreed issues. The already agreed parts of the draft Peace
Agreement provide tools for that: one of them is the
diplomatic relations to be established between Armenia and
Azerbaijan, and the second is the joint Armenia-Azerbaijan
commission to oversee the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. I mean, the existence of de jure peace between
Armenia and Azerbaijan by signing the proposed
Agreement, and the establishment of diplomatic
relations, will result in changing the overall atmosphere and
the perception of our Governments and Peoples, which will

significantly facilitate the solution of the remaining issues.

Azerbaijan, however, insists that the Constitution of the
Republic of Armenia is an obstacle to the peace Agreement,

because it allegedly contains territorial claims on Azerbaijan.

Without going into details, let me say that there is nothing
of this kind in our Constitution, there are no territorial

claims on Azerbaijan, and we can provide detailed written
proofs regarding this to all our international partners

concerned.

Moreover, it is the Constitution of Azerbaijan that contains
territorial claims on the Republic of Armenia and we can
present written argumentation on this as well to all our

international partners concerned.

But pay attention: we do not consider the Constitution of
Azerbaijan as an obstacle to the Peace Agreement for the
simple reason, that the agreed part of the draft Peace
Agreement contains wording that solves the problem and

that wording is as follows.

“None of the Parties may invoke the provisions of its internal
legislation as justification for its failure to perform the

present Agreement”.

Therefore, the signing of the Agreement will address the
concerns of both Armenia and Azerbaijan and will create
legal guarantees for addressing them fundamentally. When

we examine the agreed text of the Peace Agreement in terms
of compliance with the Constitution of the Republic of

Armenia, we see the following picture:

Under the Constitution of Armenia, agreements that

contradict the Constitution may not be ratified.

And as in other cases, after signing the Peace Agreement
with Azerbaijan, we must submit it to the Constitutional
Court to verify the compliance of the Agreement with the

Constitution of the Republic of Armenia.

If our Constitutional Court decides that the Peace
Agreement with Azerbaijan is in contradiction with the
Constitution of the Republic of Armenia (even though our
experts assure that it is not likely to happen), then we will
face a specific situation where constitutional changes will be

needed for the sake of achieving peace.

And if our Constitutional Court decides that the Agreement
complies with the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia,
then there will be no barriers for ratification in the
Parliament of Armenia, and here an extremely important

circumstance comes in.
Under Paragraph 3 of Article 5 of the Constitution of the
Republic of Armenia, ratified international agreements have
precedence over the domestic legislation of the Republic of
Armenia, and therefore, after the signing and ratification of
the Peace Agreement with Azerbaijan, theoretically, even if
there were laws that could be interpreted as containing
territorial claims, these documents would be subordinate to
the Armenia-Azerbaijan Peace Agreement and would
automatically have no legal force. The same logic would

apply to Azerbaijan of course.
Honorable President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

As you can see, here is peace so close to us and all we need
to do, is reach out and take it. It is not easy for either
Armenia or Azerbaijan, because each of us has our owntruth
and the debate over those truths has led to enmity, casualties,

and wars. The pain is very deep and intense.

But we must now focus on peace, because peace is the only

truth understandable to the people of Armenia and
Azerbaijan. And this truth will open our eyes and shut down

the sources of enmity, and we will all look to the future.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

The "Crossroads of Peace" project of the Government of the
Republic of Armenia is also dedicated to that future. The
purpose of the project is not only to open automobile routes,
railroads, and other transport communications between
Armenia and Azerbaijan, but also to provide communication
between Armenia, Azerbaijan, Turkiye and the whole
region, as well as to create opportunities for the passage of
pipelines and cables and eventually, provide opportunities
for people-to-people contacts, which is a key and critical

factor for peacemaking.

A key factor for peace and development is also that all this
shall happen with due respect for the sovereignty,
jurisdiction, territorial integrity of the countries, on the basis
of the principles of equality and reciprocity, and we are
ready to open our transport communications to both

Azerbaijan and Turkyie, as well as to our other neighbors

8
and partners. And we are ready to do it even today. Right

today.

By the way, the Crossroads of Peace can become a part of the
Middle Corridor, ensuring greater speed and efficiency of

the passage of goods through it.

The Republic of Armenia is ready to fully ensure the safety
of the passage of cargo, vehicles and people on its territory.
It is our wish; our commitment and we can do it. By the way,
all those claims that Armenia has agreed somewhere, in
some document, that third forces shall provide the security
of communications on its territory, are simply distortion of

reality.

Armenia's commitment is clear: to guarantee the safety of
cargo, vehicles and people on its territory and we guarantee
it.

Honorable President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Today I don't want to send any negative, worrying or

pessimistic message, not because they do not exist, but
because the Armenian proverb says: “Let us speak the
positive, in order to be well”, meaning that when you speak
positive, good things tend to become reality. It may be that
there is a similar saying in Azerbaijan, Turkiye, Iran,
Georgia, and in other countries in the world, and they all

consider it their own.

But “Let us speak the positive, in order to be well”, is not
about saying empty words. Of course one should work hard

and sometimes make hard decisions.

In my speech, I laid out all the circumstances that give me a
reason to speak the positive, to be well in front of this
distinguished audience. And if we rely on _ these
circumstances, good things will happen, initiating a process
of reducing the circumstances that generate the negative.

Thank you.

10
