OFFICIAL SENSITIVE

UN General Assembly Speech Prime Minister Philip Davis
September 27%, 2024

Mr. President...
Mr. Secretary General...
Your Excellencies...

My sincere congratulations to Ambassador Yang on your election as President
of the General Assembly and to your predecessor Ambassador Francis. I trust
that you will guide usand keep us on a steady course throughout this
79th Assembly.

Over the past three years, The Bahamas has been pleading with member
states to engage in urgent action in respect of climate change.

Along with other Small Island Developing States we have highlighted our
vulnerabilities, and our predicament.

We have told you what we know, shared our experiences from the frontline,
described what we are doing to address the various issues, and warned how,
our yesterdays are your tomorrows.

There has been some welcome progress: but it falls far, far short, of what is
needed.

And now we all have to live with the reality of a climate crisis, that has pushed
our planet past the critical threshold of 1.5°celsius for an entire year.

At this very moment, the new harsh reality manifests in hurricanes and heat,
fire and floods.

Member states can somehow quickly find eye-watering sums of money for
bullets and bombs, but only rattle small change in their pockets when it comes
to financing the costs of loss and damage, repair and recovery, so desperately
needed to adapt to the new climate reality.

Why?
OFFICIAL SENSITIVE

Why do members persist in ignoring the biggest threat of our lives?
The easy answer would be to say that you just don’t care.
But I cannot accept that.

To do so would be to accept a view of humanity which is at odds with my Faith
and lived experience of humanity.

But we in The Bahamas clearly see that lack of determined, committed action,
as a series of misguided, short-term choices and priorities.

We can choose differently.
We can choose better.

We can act to address real, consequential priorities, priorities that are already
impacting the lives of every single one of us, and will continue to impact the
lives of our children and their grandchildren for generations to come.

Candidacy for Security Council

The irony is that generations before us did not have an established forum such
as this: a place to come together, as a whole world, to work together for the
common good.

The genocidal crisis of the Second World War gave birth to the United
Nations, and the ensuing wars of Independence, and regional conflicts
means that we have in place, the structure for real, effective action.

And so today, as The Bahamas celebrates 51 years of membership of the United
Nations, we offer our service to the international community as we bid for non-
permanent membership of the Security Council, for the term 2032-2033.

We do so because the present crisis of today, the looming crisis of tomorrow,
requires even greater degrees of ingenuity, effort, multilateral co-operation and
sacrifice, than the world needed in the aftermath of the Second World War.

We understand well that the Council’s mandateto maintain international peace
and security, goes far beyond the mere absence of war.
OFFICIAL SENSITIVE

But we also know that, from where we stand, on the frontline of the impact of
climate change on humanity, that the mandate “to co-operate in solving
international problems” now, more than ever, requires us to stand up and step
forward.

We do so to amplify the voices of Small Island Developing States.

We do so, because the voices of Small Island Developing States are the
harbingers of what lies in store for all of us.

The Security Council of the future will not be equipped to deal with the biggest
crisis of our time, without voices like ours at the table.

The link between climate change and global security is undeniable.
Things are bad now, and they are going to get alot worse, before they get better.

Climate considerations must be integrated into all aspects of the Security
Council’s work.

Because of this, The Bahamas stands ready to advocate and support whatever
reforms are needed, to help maximise the effectiveness of the work of the
Council.

Membership for countries like ours was not what the Charter members
contemplated when the UN was established.

Butit is countries like ours which will help the Council with the inclusive, truly
representative decision-making, needed to help address the greatest crises of
our time.

Economic Security

Friends:

Aspirations to lasting global peace and security will remain empty dreams, if
not supported by economic security.

For too long, the global financial system, has been skewed against developing
nations.
OFFICIAL SENSITIVE

It is a cruel irony, that industrialized nations who bear the greatest
responsibility for the climate crisis, often perpetuate another form of injustice
in the form of our current, global system.

We have been instrumental in exposing the hypocrisy of unilateral blacklisting,
and advocating for a framework that prioritizes fairness and inclusivity.

The present system, with its dark rules and uneven playing field, drains
resources from developing countries, leaving us to grapple with the
consequences.

The Bahamas refuses to accept this double standard.

We are raising our voice to demand a fairer, and more equitable international
framework, one where the voices of all countries, regardless of population or
GDP, are heard and respected.

The Bahamas will continue to be a leading voice in championing this issue for
as long as we need to do so: no matter how lonely or how long the journey.

Unique Vulnerabilities of The Bahamas

Even among Small Island Developing States, The Bahamas is uniquely
vulnerable.

We are not waiting for solutions: we are creating them.

We have created a National Youth Guard, empowering our young people to
become environmental champions because we know that future generations
will have an enormous burden to shoulder.

Weare embracing innovation, particularly in the realm of ocean technology, to
find solutions to the climate crisis.

The Bahamas may be small in size, but we are not short on ambition or
ingenuity.

We have it said it before, but we can never say it often enough.
OFFICIAL SENSITIVE

Countries like The Bahamas contribute so little to the problems of the world,
and yet we are among the first and greatest affected.

Over 40% of my country’s national debt is as a direct result of the impacts of
climate change.

Locked as we are, into an annual cycle of severe hurricanes, repair and rebuild,
how can we fulfil the reasonable aspirations of our people for national
development?

Climate Change: A Threat Multiplier

We need to stop thinking of climate change merely as an environmental threat

It is a threat-multiplier, exacerbating existing tensions, creating new ones, and
undermining the very foundations of global security.

If we think we have refugee challenges now, do we really want to wait until
millions more are forced to cross borders, just to survive?

As resources become scarcer, as livelihoods are lost, the potential for conflict,
for instability, and mass migration, becomes inevitable.

Haiti
Your Excellencies:

In our Caribbean region, the Republic of Haiti is facing a multi-dimensional
security crisis. It is borne of gang violence and resource scarcity, made worse
by massive earthquakes, hurricanes, and other natural hazards.

In accordance with UNSC Res. 2966 passed in 2023, and in coordination with
the Government of the Haiti, member states are contributing to the
Multinational Security Support Mission.

The Bahamas governmentisstrongly ofthe view that any mission in Haiti ought
to be Haitian-led, and aim to build the capacity of the Haitian National Police to
counter gangs and improve security conditions.
OFFICIAL SENSITIVE
The Bahamas reiterates the importance of continued and sustained financial

support from donor countries, to ensure that the UN Trust Fund is able to fund
MSSM operations now and in the future.

South/South Development Co-operation

Looking beyond our region, in 2024, The Bahamas has looked to South-South
Cooperation to fill the gaps in development support.

We continue to be active participants in Caricom.

We value the support of the Commonwealth, and the solidarity between
Caribbean and Pacific Commonwealth states, and look forward to meeting this
year in Samoa.

We value the deepening relationship between Caricom and the African region.
We see renewed value in the Group of 77, and the Non-Aligned Movement.

Our concerted efforts to collectively focus on climate reparations have resulted
in new pathways to climate justice at the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea, and at the International Court of Justice.

We remain determined to protect and preserve our climate and our precious
biodiversity through the progressive development of international law.

COP29

COP29 must be a turning point.

It is estimated that by 2050, climate-related damage is projected to rise to an
almost unimaginable $38 trillion per year.

My friends, in some respects, itis already too late.
Where we are.... is not good.

But there’s still time...time just enough...if we act and act now.
OFFICIAL SENSITIVE

Let’s revitalise the stalled negotiations on the ‘New Collective Quantified Goal’
on climate finance.

We cannot afford another year of inaction.

Developed nations must step up, not just with words, but with enforceable,
concrete commitments, that reflect the scale and urgency of the crisis.

Loss and Damage Fund

While global military expenditure soared to an unprecedented $2.4 trillion last
year, the Loss and Damage Fund, painstakingly established at COP28, has
secured a mere $800 million in pledges.

This is a drop in the ocean, compared to the trillions needed to address the
escalating costs of the negative impacts of climate change.

This is not just an issue of funding.

It is fundamentally an issue of sustainability and survival.
Without it, peace and security mean nothing.

The Loss and Damage Fund must be fully operationalized.

This is about responsibility, accountability, and building a future where those
who have polluted the most, contribute the most to cleaning up the mess.

The 1.5 degrees Celsius Reality

The rise in global temperatures of more than 1.5°C this past year has put us in
a new reality.

But we must do more than roll the dice.

Real effort, serious action, tangible progress - these are the only paths to
sustainable solutions.

And the same truths remain.
OFFICIAL SENSITIVE

We must prioritise energy solutions around sources ofrenewable energy.

Re-directing the vast subsidies given to the fossil fuel industry towards
renewable energy and climate adaptation and mitigation, would be a powerful
start.

We must reform the Global Financial Institutions and systems.

We need multilateral development banks that are fit for purpose, providing
accessible finance, and prioritizing climate-resilient investments.

We must continue to work to strengthen international co-operation.
We need arenewed commitment to collective, multilateral action.

But, Friends:

Within this global emergency, we also see a glimmer of hope.

The 1.5°C threshold cannot be an endpoint, buta turning point; an opportunity
to reject complacency and chart a new course, one grounded in innovation,
collaboration, and a resolute commitment to a just and sustainable future.

We are not asking for a hand-out, but for a hand up.
Even the strongest swimmer drowns if left alone in a raging sea.

Thank you.

END
