STATEMENT

HIS EXCELLENCY DR. MOKGWEETSI E.K. MASISI
PRESIDENT
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA

DURING THE GENERAL DEBATE
OF THE 79*" SESSION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

"LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND : ACTING TOGETHER FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF PEACE, SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND
HUMAN DIGNITY FOR PRESENT AND FUTURE GENERATIONS”

SEPTEMBER 2024
NEW YORK
Mr President,
Secretary General, Mr. Antonia Gutteres
Excellencies,

Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,

1. I wish to start by extending my congratulations to you, on your election
as President of the General Assembly at its 79 Session. You can be
assured of Botswana’s full support as you steer the work of this August
body.

Mr. President,

2. This Assembly continues to meet on the backdrop of an age of multiple
and interconnected crises which were triggered by the COVID-19
pandemic and geopolitical tensions between major powers.

3. These crises have been further compounded by the Israel-Hamas war,
which erupted shortly after we concluded last year’s High-Level Week.

4. The attacks on innocent civilians on both sides are unacceptable and
thus stand condemned.

5. In the same vein, we wish to express our deep concern at the situation

in the Gaza Strip where the war has resulted in catastrophic
10.

humanitarian crisis and unprecedented fatalities for civilian, children

and humanitarian workers.

I should also register Botswana’s concern regarding the loss of lives of
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) personnel.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute to UNRWA personnel and all
humanitarian workers and their commitment to deliver aid, save lives
and alleviate suffering in Gaza and elsewhere. We owe them a debt of
gratitude and they deserve our full protection.

Botswana also abhors attacks on UNRWA installations and condemns
disinformation and misinformation campaigns against this life-saving

General Assembly-mandated Agency.

Botswana firmly supports the work of UNRWA, which entails providing
humanitarian and development assistance and protection to Palestine
refugees, pending the just resolution of the question of the Palestinian
question.

In this regard, Botswana is proud to be among the countries that joined
the "Statement of Shared Commitments on UNRWA,” which
reaffirms support for the agency, its mandate, its staff and highlights
its indispensable role during this difficult time.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Mr. President,

We wish to reiterate the centrality of the two-state solution in resolving
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the attainment of a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace.

We therefore urge parties to commit to a political process that will pave
the way for the realization of the two-state solution, in which Palestine
and Israel live side by side, in peace and security, based on pre-1967

borders.

Mr. President,

The war in Ukraine also rages on with no indication end in sight. We
continue to underscore the need to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine, in line with the UN Charter and
international law. We also call on parties to give diplomacy and
dialogue a chance and to seek a peaceful resolution.

In Africa, the guns still have not gone silent. We continue to grapple
with armed conflict, terrorism and potentially explosive geopolitical

tensions.

We commend the African Union (AU), sub-regional bodies as well as
the UN for their efforts in addressing these challenges. In this vein, we
16.

17.

welcome the adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 2719 (2023)
on the provision of support by the UN to AU-led Peace Support
Operations on a case-by-case basis and look forward to its
operationalisation.

Mr. President,

I must add that this time of escalated armed conflicts, violent crime
and humanitarian crises requires intensified efforts and more vigilance
to protect human rights, advance humanitarian action and promote
accountability in line with the UN Charter, international law,
international humanitarian law as well as relevant principles such as
the Responsibility to Protect (R2P).

Mr. President,

It is evident that peace is under strain across the world. It needs to be
revitalised. However, that task cannot only be left to multilateral and
regional bodies. Governments have a responsibility to create conditions
that enable peace to thrive within their countries. Key steps that
Governments should take include, among others, building effective
institutions, committing to good governance, protection of human

rights and upholding democratic values.
18.

19.

20.

21.

As many are aware, Botswana has a long track record of commitment
to these democratic principles. The implementation of
recommendations from our recently concluded constitutional review
process as well as our upcoming general election on 30" October 2024
provide opportunities to deepen our democracy and strengthen our

good governance credentials.

Mr. President,

Regrettably, while the on the one hand, the scourge of war rages on,
on the other hand, the promise of Sustainable Development is in great
peril.

It is deeply concerning that with only six (6) years before the 2030
deadline, Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are way off track. We
learn from the latest Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Report that
only 17% of the Goals are on track while the rest range from moderate
progress to stagnation and regression.

There is a lot of work to do. We must take inspiration from and build
on the success achieved in the reduction in global child mortality,
prevention of HIV infections, attaining girls’ parity with boys in
education, increased access to energy and the internet, while also
scaling up action and investments in areas which are lagging far behind
particularly poverty eradication.
22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

The levels of extreme poverty remain disturbingly high. But we cannot
attain sustainable development without eradicating poverty in all its
forms and manifestations. Poverty eradication is the sine qua non of

sustainable development.

A comprehensive approach will be required to move the needle in the
fight against poverty. We therefore endorse the call for comprehensive

social protection systems and inclusive economic policies.

Pro-poor policies should also be complemented and reinforced by
policies which spur inclusive economic growth and create sustainable

employment.

Policy interventions that aim to Leave No One Behind ought to be
matched by adequate SDG financing. In this vein, my delegation
reiterates the call for predictable, sustainable and sufficient

development finance to developing countries from all funding sources.

In addition to livelihood issues, progress should also be accelerated in
addressing other forms of inequality within countries especially gender
equality. Meaningful action is needed to empower women and girls in
areas where they are left behind and to combat harmful cultural
practices and gender-based violence.
27.

28.

29.

30.

Mr. President,

Extreme weather events and related natural disasters continue to
remind us of the severity of the climate crisis and the urgency of
mitigation and adaptation.

In our sub-region, Southern Africa, the El nifto phenomenon induced
drought and floods which resulted in devastating consequences on
livelihoods and a humanitarian situation that affected over sixty-one
(61) million people.

I take this opportunity to reiterate the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) Regional Humanitarian Appeal of at least US$5.5
billion, aimed at augmenting domestic resources of the affected
Member States, including efforts for resource mobilisation from
national, regional, and international partners in response to the
impacts of El Nifio induced drought and floods.

I cannot overemphasize the need for adequate climate finance for
effective climate action. We continue to remind developed countries of
their annual $100 billion commitment in climate finance for developing

countries until 2025 and call for a more ambitious goal thereafter.
31.

32.

33.

34.

Mr. President,

Efforts at attaining Sustainable Development ought to be redoubled in
countries in special situations, in particular, Small Island Developing
States (SIDS), Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and Landlocked
Developing Countries (LLDCs) which are disproportionately affected by
development challenges.

Botswana as an LLDC and current Chair of the Group of LLDCs at the
UN, is deeply concerned by the enormity of challenges faced by LLDCs
in their effort to implement the 2030 Agenda and its SDGs.

With no direct territorial access to the sea, LLDCs struggle with
international trade, connectivity, and economic development. Our
countries are cut off from the global marketplace and without the
means to develop adequate transport and logistics infrastructure and
inevitably face significant challenges in achieving the sustainable
development goals.

The forthcoming Third UN Conference on Landlocked Developing
Countries (LLDC3) from 10-13 December 2024 in Gaborone, Botswana,
under the theme “Driving Progress through Partnerships,” will provide
an opportunity to effectively address these challenges in an ambitious,
action oriented and forward-looking Programme of Action.
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

I therefore invite transit countries, development partners and other
stakeholders to join us in the beautiful and vibrant Gaborone as we
shape the future for our thirty-two (32) countries.

Mr. President,

As you rightly observe, it is only when we “act together” that we can
effectively deliver meaningful progress for people, planet, prosperity
and peace while leaving no one behind.

Without a doubt, the UN-led multilateral system remains an
indispensable platform for the effective global action that this moment
demands. It is therefore of paramount importance that the multilateral

framework remains fit-for-purpose.

The onus is on us as member states to ensure that our
intergovernmental processes enable rather than stifle effective

multilateral action and international cooperation.

We must not allow the current geopolitical tensions and great power
rivalries to get in the way of progress. Our shared values, norms and
interests as expressed in the UN Charter, the 2030 Agenda and other
relevant frameworks should remain the North Star that guides our
engagements. The spirit of consensus and solidarity ought to be at the

front and center of our actions.
40.

Mr. President,

Allow me to conclude by reaffirming Botswana's commitment to
working constructively on all agenda items before the General
Assembly during this session. The session offers opportunities to
turbocharge action for peace, sustainable development and human
rights, for the benefit of present and future generations. Let us seize

the moment.

I thank you.
