Statement by the Hon. Francis Fonseca, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade,
Education, Culture, Science and Technology of Belize
General Debate
79 Session of the United Nations General Assembly
28 September 2024

Mr. President,
The self-determination of a people is sacrosanct.

It is because of the exercise of that right to self-determination that each nation enjoys

the privilege of sitting in this Hall.

Our nations exist by the will of our people, by virtue of their right to determine their

political status and pursue theit economic, cultural, and social development.

To borrow words from Nelson Mandela, [our people] are the real makers of history; their

participation in every decision about the future is the only guarantee of true democracy and freedom.

If we look at the challenges that our people confront today, we must ask whether that

sacrosanct principle of self-determination is in fact secure?
Mr. President,

Belize is a member of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), one of 39 countries

that have been on the front lines of the climate crisis.

The genesis of this crisis lies with the industrialized nations. Its perpetuation and

acceleration rests with the wider membership of the Group of 20 (G20). Currently, the

Check against delivery
G20 accounts for some 80 percent of global emissions. AOSIS Members contribute

less than one percent of global emissions.
This is a tale of two worlds; but we only have one planet to shate.

The extent to which G20 economies ate advancing, and contributing to global
economic output and world trade is impressive and promising for their people. It is
important that their growth should be calibrated to a world where SIDS also have a

secure future. This is still possible, but it is urgent.

As SIDS, our people’s livelihoods have long depended on traditional sectors such as
agriculture, fisheries and tourism which are climate sensitive. Opportunities for

diversification have been limited given our size, population, and location.

Climate change is forcing us to break with tradition and to transition despite the limited
options to do so. Each step forward is met with yet another hurdle to overcome and,
with increasing probability we face the likelihood of setbacks as climate change impacts
worsen. The costs are multiplying, fiscal space is shrinking, and the opportunities to

equitably share in global prosperity are diminishing.
The right of SIDS to define their own future must be protected and secured.
The severe impacts of sea level rise have irreversible consequences for SIDS.

Our people have gone beyond their duty to protect and preserve our environment, yet
some ate being forced to relocate from their homelands. To this, we reiterate that no
matter the physical changes that climate change may bring to our territory, our

sovereignty and our right to self-determination remain intact.
Mr. President,
The perpetual suffering of a people can never just be a matter of national concern.

The United Nations rose up from the ashes of war, to restore “faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men
and women and of nations large and small, and to establish conditions under which
justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law can be maintained, and to promote social progress and better

standards of life in larger freedom.”
All members of the United Nations have a duty to give effect to these words.

Conflicts should not be allowed to fester. The war in Ukraine is now two years running

and we ate concerned that the end is still not near.

Haiti has seized our attention once again. For Belize, the international response must

be enduring for long lasting peace and security of our sister country.

We are working through the Caribbean Community to reinforce and strengthen Haiti,
and we commend the Haitian people in their resolve to define their own pathway
forward. We ate pleased to be contributing personnel to the Multinational Security

Support Mission (MSS).

Belize is extremely worried that up to now the international community has not fully
delivered on its commitments for the MSS nor the UN Humanitarian Needs and
Response Plan for Haiti. This jeopardizes all the efforts towards establishing political

stability but more than that puts the future of Haiti at substantial risk.
Mr. President,

Cuba should no longer be subject to an unjust and illegal economic embargo imposed
by the United States. It is imperative that Cuba be removed from the list of state
sponsors of terrorism. This arbitrary and unilateral designation has created an
unnecessary barrier to global cooperation, constructive engagement, and the promotion

of peace and stability in our region.
Mr. President,

Belize rejects the continued denial of self-determination of the Palestinian people and
calls for the eradication of the system of colonial domination and apartheid being
imposed upon them. As Belize stated to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in the
recent Advisory Opinion, “Israel cannot be permitted to continue flouting one of the
most fundamental principles of international law with impunity. Impunity breeds

inhumanity.”

Just two weeks ago, this Assembly approved a resolution proposed by Palestine
affirming the IC]’s advisory opinion and called on Members to act to re-enforce the

Palestinian people’s right to self-determination.
The war, the oppression and the inhumanity must end.
Mr. President,

Taiwan is a nation that espouses democracy, development, and innovation. The
challenges we are tackling as an international community requires Taiwan’s full
inclusion and participation in the international system. Belize calls for this to be done

immediately.
The people of Western Sahara should be granted their long overdue referendum to
decide their own future. Belize continues its repeated call for the UN and the
international community to take the necessary steps to allow the Sahrawi people to

finally exercise their right to self-determination.
Mr. President,

I submit to you and this Assembly that the foundation of “leaving no one behind”
requires that we actively promote and protect the right of self-determination in its most
basic form, in the context of peace and security. Now we must also do so in the context

of sustainable development.

We have adopted a rescue plan to steer the SDGs back on course. We have a Pact for
the Future. We must use every opportunity to put in place the systems and financing
necessaty to turbocharge our sustainable development and climate goals. In this effort,
we must ensure equal opportunity for all to share in global prosperity. We must raise

collective ambition and invest in all our people to empower them to rise.
Mr. President,

The Declaration on Sea Level Rise and Statehood adopted by the Leaders of the
Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) on 23*4 September affirms that the sovereignty
or statehood of small island developing states cannot be challenged under any
circumstances of climate change-related sea level rise. We invite all UN Member States
to support the implementation of this Declaration and to use it as the basis of

international cooperation.
To further guarantee that SIDS will be spared the gravest climate threats, global
watming must be limited to well below 1.5 degrees Celsius. Belize urges the G20 to

enhance their emission reduction targets to achieve this temperature limit.

For SIDS, adaptation is imperative, and loss and damage associated with climate change
is inevitable. The new climate finance goal to be decided in Baku must contain specific
recommendations for minimum allocation to SIDS in relation to grant-based and
concessional finance for adaptation and grants for loss and damage. It must also give
effect to the provisions of the Paris Agreement which requite enhanced access for SIDS
and LDCs to climate finance. Finally, it must support the urgent capitalization of the

Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage.
Mr. President,

With the adoption of the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS, the UN must now

ensure its implementation.

SIDS must be at the table in global economic and international financial institutions.
The multidimensional vulnerability index should be incorporated into existing practices
and policies for debt sustainability and development support to expand SIDS’ access to

effective development finance.
Mr. President,
Belize is moving ahead. We are on a transformative development trajectory.

We have dramatically improved our credit profile through the Belize Blue Bond Project,
a debt for marine conservation swap. We are reforming and modernizing our legislative
and policy frameworks for investments and activating our orange and blue economies

including beyond our national jurisdiction.
In partnership with the United States of America, we have signed a five-year USD125
million grant agreement with the Millennium Challenge Corporation intended to help

reduce poverty in Belize by addressing the country's energy and education sectors.

We are making targeted investments to ensure that every child has access to quality
education and opportunities. One key example is the Belize Education Upliftment
Project- Together we rise, which provides half of Belizean secondary school students with
the resources they need to succeed—including free tuition, uniforms, school supplies,
and healthy meals. Belize has extended the compulsory school age to 16 years, to
improve school retention rates and increase the likelihood of transitioning to higher
education. We are working tirelessly to expand vocational training, digital access, and
life skills development, ensuring that young people are prepared for the evolving job
market and capable of driving innovation in sectors such as agriculture, climate change,

and technology.

We are aggressively closing the digital divide as technology holds the promise of
progress. But we depend on multilateral efforts to ensure that all nations, regardless of

size or wealth, have the infrastructure and capacity to participate in the digital economy.

Education and capacity building alone are not enough. Addressing inequalities and

fostering inclusion are equally critical to achieving lasting change.

The achievement of gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls is
central to this effort. Belize has made important progress in this area, marked by the
recent launch of its Revised National Gender Policy 2024-2030, which aims to end
discrimination and violence against women while promoting their full participation in

all aspects of society- social, economic, and political.
Belize continues its work to ensure that every Belizean has access to high quality,
affordable and efficient health care services. By January 2025, we will achieve full
national health insurance coverage. We are also strengthening our mental health support
systems with the goal of improving and expanding access to quality care, addressing the
stigma surrounding mental health, and enhancing outreach programs, particularly in

rural and underserved areas.
Mr. President,

Belize is committed to the final settlement of Guatemala’s territorial insular and
maritime claim. We welcome Guatemala’s stated commitment to respecting and abiding
by the ruling of the International Court of Justice. At the political level, we are actively
engaged with Guatemala to strengthen our bilateral relationship. A definitive solution
will bring greater opportunities for both of our nations in the areas of trade, investment,

and cooperation.
Mr. President,

Belize reaffirms its commitment to the United Nations as the central platform for

coordinated global action.

But its decision-making processes need to be more inclusive, more responsive, and
representative. Its institutions cannot be held back by the world as it was eighty years

ago. Reform is urgent and necessary to reflect the world as it is.
Mr. President,

The youth of today have given us a clear, undeniable mandate. They demand action,
accountability, and a future where they are heard, seen and respected. We ignore them

at our own peril. We must not fail them. It is our responsibility to heed their calls for
change. We must deliver on our commitments and build a world that present and future

generations deserve.

Thank you.
