9/24/24, 4:31 PM vbs.admin.ch/en/nsb?id=102554

U Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection

Confédération suisse and Sports
Confederazione Svizzera

Confederaziun svizra

Published on 23 September 2024

Speech by President Viola Amherd at the UN
General Debate

Bern, 23.9.2024 - Speech by President Viola Amherd, head of the Federal
Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sport (DDPS), at the UN
General Debate, New, York, Tuesday, 24 September 2024.

https:/Awww.vbs.admin.ch/en/nsb?id=102554

15
9/24/24, 4:31 PM

vbs.admin.ch/en/nsb?id=102554

Check against delivery

Mr President
Secretary-General
Excellencies

Ladies and gentlemen

On the morning of 3 March 2002, I put a card into the ballot box, on which I had
written a determined ‘yes’. Our TV screens had been filled with various forecasts
and figures from the early hours.

But it was only in the evening that the final result came through: after years of
struggle and a fiercely contested campaign, Switzerland would join the United
Nations.

Ultimately, it was a few hundred votes from the canton of Valais - my home region
- that tipped the balance.

On that day, the Swiss people expressed their country's desire to assume
responsibility and take part in the world of international politics in a spirit of
solidarity.

More than two decades have now passed. I am addressing you today, just a few
days before Switzerland assumes the presidency of the Security Council. The world
may have changed, but our principles have not.

Like many countries, we are following with concern the escalating tensions and
emergence of new conflicts around the world.

Unfortunately, we are witnessing increasing levels of grave human rights violations
as well as a growing, blatant disregard for internationally recognised borders.
Might risks taking precedence over right, and the threshold for resorting to
military force has clearly fallen significantly.

Only together can we counter the dynamic, captured so aptly by the great writer
Ferdinand Ramuz a century ago: “Parce qu'un malheur ne vient jamais qu'un autre
ne vienne ; les malheurs se marient entre eux, ils font des enfants.”

There are major challenges ahead: wars, disasters, the damage we are inflicting on
our shared environment, technological advancements and the opportunities and
risks they bring.

As the only truly global organisation, the UN has a crucial role to play in tackling
these issues.

We can make a start right here, if we choose to work together better - regardless
of our governmental and economic structures or our cultural differences.

We must not let our world fragment into blocs. We must show our willingness to
negotiate principles with all major regions of the world, principles that are in our
mutual interest and respected by all. And this must always be underpinned by
international law.

https:/Awww.vbs.admin.ch/en/nsb?id=102554

2/5
9/24/24, 4:31 PM

vbs.admin.ch/en/nsb?id=102554
Excellencies
Ladies and gentlemen

The search for peace is paramount, and Switzerland is committed to playing its
part.

Based on its tradition of good offices and solidarity, and because resignation and
inaction should never be an option, this summer Switzerland brought together
around 100 states and international organisations for the Summit on Peace in
Ukraine.

Our goal was to provide an initial impetus for a just and lasting peace in Ukraine,
based on international law and the United Nations Charter. The conference at the
Burgenstock marked an important step in that direction.

The 94 signatory states of the BUrgenstock Joint Communiqué reaffirmed their
commitment to the principles of the United Nations Charter.

We would like to renew our invitation to the international community to spare no
effort in supporting concrete measures and this Joint Communiqué.

International law is the basis for our common endeavours for global peace,
security and prosperity.

The Geneva Conventions, the 75th anniversary of which we are celebrating this
year, govern the legal basis of war as well as the protection of the civilian
population.

But the latest UN figures paint the international community in a poor light.
Civilians and civilian infrastructure are not only inadequately protected, but in fact
come under repeated attack.

We are witnessing violations of international humanitarian law, from Myanmar to
Ukraine, from the Middle East to Sudan. My country has been strongly committed
0 ensuring that the Security Council adopts ceasefire resolutions, particularly for
Gaza and Sudan.

It is urgent that these resolutions are now implemented and respected. Likewise,
we urgently call for an immediate return to a total cessation of hostilities on both
sides of the Blue Line.

The heavy toll paid by civilian populations in these current crises and conflicts
strengthens Switzerland's resolve to ensure that international humanitarian law
remains an absolute priority. Pushing for greater compliance is at the heart of our
work in the Security Council.

Protecting the civilian population in conflicts is neither self-evident nor guaranteed.
It must be afforded higher priority in conflict situations.

Peace is and always will be the best way to protect civilian populations. To this end,
Switzerland is also committed to civilian and military peacebuilding.

Even if some peace missions have been unable to meet all of their intended

https:/Awww.vbs.admin.ch/en/nsb?id=102554

3/5
9/24/24, 4:31 PM

vbs.admin.ch/en/nsb?id=102554
objectives, they nevertheless contribute to security, stability and peace in people's
everyday lives. When deciding which missions to deploy, we must overcome our
disagreements. Peace is too precious a commodity to become a pawn of self-
serving interests.

Together with our many international partners, Switzerland is continuing to
contribute to peacebuilding as well as expanding its capacities where possible.

War and peace are not the only challenges we face. There are many others that we
also need to urgently address:

Civilians not only require protection from armed conflict, but also from natural
disasters, as has become increasingly clear in recent years. Climate change and
loss of biodiversity are having an existential impact on ever more people.

It is crucial that we also maintain and expand our efforts in these areas, while
forging ahead with pioneering developments. Many of the international
environmental agreements are either not implemented at all or only inadequately.
This is resulting in large-scale environmental destruction.

I am also concerned about the rise in disinformation, which undermines people's
ability to form their own opinions based on facts. Private and state actors spread
disinformation at home and in other states to fuel polarisation, sow distrust and
destabilise states.

Switzerland has and will always be committed to freedom of expression and media
freedom.

Disinformation is toxic. We can counteract this by improving our understanding of
what constitutes free speech and manipulation of the facts; by exposing
illegitimate interference, by fostering open and fair debate, and, in our capacities
as governments and international organisations, by providing transparent and
factual information.

Excellencies
Ladies and gentlemen

Switzerland has and always will be committed to strong and effective
multilateralism.

All states must come together to find lasting solutions.

My country is shaped by regular democratic debate at all levels of government -
local, regional and federal. We urgently need to see more of such constructive and
peaceful debate if we are to address the existential challenges that face us.

Two days ago, we adopted the Pact for the Future. The pact is a strong
commitment to multilateralism. One of the core elements of the pact is the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development - our roadmap, which we must implement
together as quickly as possible.

"The idea must be born from the vision, like the spark from a flint." That too is a
quote from Ramuz - one that has lost none of its relevance. We need courage and
confidence.

https:/Awww.vbs.admin.ch/en/nsb?id=102554

AIS
9/24/24, 4:31 PM vbs.admin.ch/en/nsb?id=102554
And we need a framework in which we can work together as partners to find
solutions. That framework is the United Nations. Let us work together to make it
stronger.

Thank you.

More about «Speech by President Viola Amherd at the UN General Debate»:

¢ Opening week of the 79th session of the UN General Assembly

Address for enquiries

DDPS Communication
Federal Palace East
CH-3003 Bern

Publisher

Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports
www.vbs.admin.ch

Topics
President of the Swiss Confederation Switzerland and Foreign Affairs

Security

https:/Awww.vbs.admin.ch/en/nsb?id=102554 5/5,
