9/30/24, 6:17 PM Building on Past Achievements and Forging Ahead Together Toward a Community with a Shared Future for Mankind_Ministry ...

Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The People’s Republic of China

HOME > MINISTER’S ACTIVITIES

Building on Past Achievements and
Forging Ahead Together Toward a
Community with a Shared Future for
Mankind

Updated: SEPTEMBER 29, 2024 08:37 (3)

Statement by H.E. Wang Yi
Member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee and
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China
At the General Debate of the 79th Session of
The United Nations General Assembly

New York, September 28, 2024

Mr. President,
Colleagues,

Today, humanity has once again come to a historical crossroads. We are facing a changing and
turbulent world. Challenges of insecurity, imbalanced development and ineffective governance are
increasingly prominent. Hotspot conflicts, major-country confrontation and geopolitical tensions
keep emerging. The future of this planet is becoming a cause for growing concern. Meanwhile, we are

https://www.fmpre.gov.cn/eng/wjbzhd/202409/t20240929_11499995.html

1/6
9/30/24, 6:17 PM Building on Past Achievements and Forging Ahead Together Toward a Community with a Shared Future for Mankind_Ministry ...
also embracing a world full of hope. Multipolarity and globalization have become the unstoppable
trend of our times. The aspirations of the Global South nations for modernization has never been
stronger. Our stride toward modernization has never been more steadfast.

This institution, the United Nations, embodies the aspirations of people across the world for lasting
peace and common prosperity, and bears witness to the glorious journey of the international
community coming together in pursuit of progress. President Xi Jinping stressed on multiple
occasions that the role of the U.N. should be strengthened, not weakened. Amid global transformation
not seen in a century, what China calls for is to follow the trend of the times, keep to the direction of
human progress, and make the right choices of history. What China proposes is to uphold peaceful
coexistence and put in place a security architecture that ensures enduring stability; uphold openness
and inclusiveness and foster a development paradigm that promotes shared prosperity; uphold
harmony without uniformity and adopt an approach to civilizations that promotes exchange and
mutual learning; and uphold fairness and justice and develop a governance structure that pools
strengths for shared benefit.

In today’s world, the security of all countries is tied together. In face of various kinds of global
challenges and risks, no one can stay immune or enjoy security alone. Countries need to be guided by
a vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We should respect each
other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, take the legitimate security concerns of others seriously,
and resolve disputes and differences through dialogue and consultation. We should actively explore a
path for major countries to coexist in peace, and work for a new type of international relations
characterized by mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win cooperation.

In today’s world, the development of all countries is deeply integrated. If the rich get richer while the
poor remain poor, then “everyone is born equal” would become an empty slogan, and fairness and
justice would be even more elusive. Achieving modernization is a legitimate right of the people of all
countries, not a prerogative of a few. We should be committed to advancing global modernization,
and ensure that no one and no country is left behind on the journey toward modernization. We should
advocate a universally beneficial and inclusive globalization, unequivocally oppose unilateralism and
protectionism, and help developing countries leap over the development divide, to maintain the
vitality of global economic growth.

In today’s world, each civilization has its own strengths. President Xi Jinping pointed out that there is
no such thing as a superior or inferior civilization, and civilizations are different only in identity and
location. We should respect the diversity of civilizations, and strive to replace estrangement and clash
of civilizations with exchanges and mutual learning. We should advocate humanity’s common values,
namely, peace, development, equity, justice, democracy and freedom, refrain from conducting values-
oriented diplomacy, and oppose ideology-based confrontation. We should respect each other as
equals, and help each other succeed with an inclusive mind.

In today’s world, countries should all enjoy sovereign equality. As a large number of Global South
nations are growing with a strong momentum, gone are the days when one or two major powers call
the shots on everything. We should advocate an equal and orderly multipolar world, and see that all
countries, regardless of their size, have their own place and role in the multipolar system. We should
practice true multilateralism, oppose hegemonism and power politics, and make international
relations more democratic. We should follow the principle of extensive consultation and joint
contribution for shared benefit, and make global governance more just and equitable.

Mr. President,

https://www.fmpre.gov.cn/eng/wjbzhd/202409/t20240929_11499995.html 2/6
9/30/24, 6:17 PM Building on Past Achievements and Forging Ahead Together Toward a Community with a Shared Future for Mankind_Ministry ...
Peace is the most precious thing in our world today. You may wonder if there is a path leading to
peace. In fact, peace is the path. Without peace, development will not sustain; without peace,
cooperation cannot happen. For the sake of peace, a single ray of hope is reason enough not to give
up; the slightest chance deserves a hundredfold effort.

An end to the Ukraine crisis remains elusive. The top priority is to commit to “no expansion of the
battlefield, no escalation of fighting and no provocation by any party,” and push for deescalation of
the situation as soon as possible. China is committed to playing a constructive role, engaging in
shuttle mediation and promoting talks for peace, not throwing oil on the fire or exploiting the
situation for selfish gains. At this session of the General Assembly, China, Brazil and other Global
South countries have jointly launched the group of Friends for Peace. Its very purpose is to uphold the
purposes and principles of the U.N. Charter, build consensus for a political settlement of the crisis
and contribute to a prospect of peace.

The question of Palestine is the biggest wound to human conscience. As we speak, the conflict in Gaza
is still going on, causing more civilian casualties with each passing day. Fighting has spread to
Lebanon; might must not take the place of justice. Palestine’s long-held aspiration to establish an
independent state should not be shunned anymore, and the historical injustice suffered by the
Palestinian people should not be ignored any longer. There must not be any delay in reaching a
comprehensive ceasefire, and the fundamental way out lies in the two-State solution. China has
always been a staunch supporter of the just cause of the Palestinian people to regain their legitimate
national rights, and a staunch supporter of Palestine’s full U.N. membership. We have recently helped
to bring about breakthroughs in intra-Palestine reconciliation, and will continue to work in concert
with like-minded countries for a comprehensive and just settlement of the question of Palestine and
durable peace and security in the Middle East.

The issue of Afghanistan concerns regional peace and security. It is important to help Afghanistan
exercise prudent governance, fight terrorism effectively, improve people’s life and reinvigorate the
economy, to open up a better future for the Afghan people.

The Korean Peninsula should not experience war again. The important thing is to make persistent
effort for deescalation, commit to seeking solutions through dialogue and consultation, realize a
transition from the armistice to a peace mechanism, and safeguard peace and stability on the
Peninsula.

China is deeply aware that Asia needs stability and development and opposes division and conflict. As
an important origin of human civilization and a key engine of global growth, Asia has the wisdom and
capability to stabilize the situation through regional cooperation and handle differences properly
through dialogue and consultation. We are firmly against the meddling by countries outside the
region, and will resolutely resist attempts by any force to stoke trouble and confrontation in the
region.

Mr. President,

As the world faces increasingly serious challenges, China has never opted to be an indifferent
spectator. Instead, we have been playing a bigger part in global governance than ever before.
President Xi Jinping has put forth the Global Development Initiative, the Global Security Initiative
and the Global Civilization Initiative in recent years. They carry China’s wisdom for resolving various
difficult issues confronting humanity, and bring impetus from China for improving global governance.

https://www.fmpre.gov.cn/eng/wjbzhd/202409/t20240929_11499995.html 3/6
9/30/24, 6:17 PM Building on Past Achievements and Forging Ahead Together Toward a Community with a Shared Future for Mankind_Ministry ...

In the face of uneven and inadequate global development, China’s proposal is to put development at
the top of the global agenda, focus on delivering the Sustainable Development Goals of the U.N. 2030
Agenda, increase input in development, and help developing countries better respond to different
risks and challenges. At the recent Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation,
President Xi Jinping outlined 10 partnership actions to be taken together with Africa to advance
modernization, and announced the decision to give over 40 LDCs, including those in Africa, zero-
tariff treatment for 100 percent tariff lines. China is the first major developing country and the first
major economy to take such a significant step.

In the face of unilateral, bullying acts such as sanctions and blockade, China firmly supports countries
in defending their legitimate rights, upholding the equity and openness of the international system,
making global development more coordinated and beneficial for all, and jointly opposing technology
blockade and rejecting decoupling or severing supply chains. Sanctions and pressure will not bring
monopolistic advantages. Suppressing and containing others will not solve problems at home. The
right of people of all countries to pursue a better life should not be taken away. Here, we once again
urge the United States to completely lift its blockade, sanctions and terrorism-related designation
against Cuba.

In the face of aggravating ecological challenges, China is firmly committed to a path of green, low-
carbon and sustainable development. We will move from carbon peaking to carbon neutrality in the
shortest time span in world history, contributing China’s efforts to harmonious coexistence between
humanity and nature. At the global level, the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
must be upheld, and the Paris Agreement must be implemented in earnest. Developed countries
should assist developing countries in building their capacity to cope with climate change. Touting the
need of climate response while suppressing the green industries of others will only hold back global
progress in green transition.

In the face of burgeoning artificial intelligence (AI), China is committed to taking a people-centered
approach, developing AI for good, and putting equal emphasis on development and security. We are
working to explore and establish widely-recognized international rules and standards. China supports
the U.N.’s role as the main channel for global AI governance and is committed to strengthening
international cooperation on AI capacity-building. China has put forth the AI Capacity-Building
Action Plan for Good and for All, and is ready to make more contributions to the sound, orderly, fair
and inclusive development of AI.

In the face of the task of human rights protection, China maintains that all countries’ right to
independently choose their path of human rights development should be respected. No country
should impose its own will on others, or arbitrarily interfere in others’ internal affairs citing human
rights as an excuse. In human rights protection, China is committed to putting people first and
promoting the free and well-rounded development of the people. We have found a path of human
rights development that suits China’s national conditions. China is ready to engage in dialogue and
exchanges with all countries and U.N. human rights bodies on an equal footing, and jointly promote
the sound development of the global human rights cause.

Mr. President,

Taiwan is an inalienable part of China’s territory. This is the history and the reality. Both the Cairo
Declaration and the Potsdam Proclamation stated in explicit terms that all the territories Japan had
stolen from the Chinese, such as Taiwan and the Penghu Islands, shall be restored to China, and this
constitutes an important part of the post-war international order. Right here in this august hall 53

https://www.fmpre.gov.cn/eng/wjbzhd/202409/t20240929_11499995.html 4/6
9/30/24, 6:17 PM Building on Past Achievements and Forging Ahead Together Toward a Community with a Shared Future for Mankind_Ministry ...
years ago, the 26th session of the U.N. General Assembly adopted Resolution 2758 with an
overwhelming majority, deciding to restore all the rights of the People’s Republic of China at the U.N.,
to recognize the representatives of the Government of the People’s Republic of China as the only
legitimate representatives of China to the U.N., and to expel forthwith the representatives of the
Taiwan region from the U.N. and all the organizations related to it. Once and for all, the resolution
resolved the issue of the representation of the whole of China, including Taiwan, in the U.N. It made
clear that there is no such thing as “two Chinas,” or “one China, one Taiwan.” On this matter of
principle, there is no gray zone or room for ambiguity. The complete reunification of China will be
achieved. Taiwan will eventually return to the embrace of the motherland. This is the overwhelming
trend of history that no one and no force can stop.

Mr. President,

In a few days’ time, the People’s Republic of China will celebrate the 75th anniversary of its founding.
Over the past 75 years, no matter how the world changes, China’s dedication has not changed. It is
dedicated to pursuing happiness for the Chinese people and the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. It
is also dedicated to human progress and world harmony. In the course of seeking its own
development, China has kept in mind the common interests of the whole world, generating new
opportunities for the world through its own development. Not long ago, the Third Plenum of the 20th
CPC Central Committee made an important decision on further deepening reform comprehensively to
advance Chinese modernization. It set in motion a new journey where China joins hands with the
world in common development and progress.

Chinese modernization will contribute robustly to world peace and stability. The Chinese culture
values peace, and the Chinese nation has no tradition of external expansion. China, once a victim of
foreign power bullying, knows full well the value of peace and the hard-won gains of development. In
fact, China is the only major country that has written peaceful development into its constitution, and
the only country among the five nuclear-weapon states to pledge no-first-use of nuclear weapons. We
are actively exploring and putting into practice the Chinese way of addressing hotspot issues, boosting
the prospects for resolving the security dilemma and improving security governance, and paving the
ground for conflict settlement and peacebuilding. Every step in China’s development is an increase in
the force for peace.

Chinese modernization will contribute robustly to the common development for all. China does not
only care about its own development. We are ready to develop hand in hand with all countries. By
further expanding high-standard opening up, China is aligning proactively with high-standard
international economic and trade rules to foster a market-oriented, law-based and world-class
business environment. China has realized full mutual visa exemption with many countries, and is
expanding its unilateral visa waiver program to facilitate two-way personnel flows. China is vigorously
promoting high-quality Belt and Road cooperation, a concrete step to support the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. China will also speed up the implementation of the eight measures in
support of Global South cooperation and the series of initiatives supporting Africa’s peace and
development, in order to help countries in the Global South stride toward modernization.

Chinese modernization will contribute robustly to improving global governance. China has been an
abiding supporter of the U.N.’s continued reform and development to bring about a modernized “U.N.
2.0.” The international financial system needs to be more fit for the times and global governance
should be more balanced and effective. China will continue to fulfill its international obligations,
provide financial support and send our best minds to the United Nations. The U.N. system needs to

https://www.fmpre.gov.cn/eng/wjbzhd/202409/t20240929_11499995.html 5/6
9/30/24, 6:17 PM Building on Past Achievements and Forging Ahead Together Toward a Community with a Shared Future for Mankind_Ministry ...

respond to the legitimate calls of developing countries and increase the representation and voice of
those in the Global South.

Chinese modernization will contribute robustly to the advancement of human civilization. Chinese
modernization is rooted in China, but has also drawn on the achievements of other civilizations. It has
created a new form of human advancement, and provided a new choice to other countries in exploring
modernization paths. China believes that different civilizations should respect and learn from one
another, and jointly contribute to the progress of human civilization. China has proposed the setting
up of an International Day for Dialogue among Civilizations. We call for more people-to-people
exchanges and cooperation across the world, to strengthen mutual understanding and amity among
people of all countries.

Mr. President,

Next year will mark the 80th anniversary of the victory of the World Anti-Fascist War and the
founding of this very Organization. China stands ready to work with all countries to renew the
founding purposes and mission of the U.N., reaffirm our steadfast commitment to the U.N. Charter,
advocate and practice true multilateralism, build a community with a shared future for mankind, and
jointly usher in a better world.

Thank you.

Links:

State Council | Ministry of Commerce | National Development and Reform Commission |

National Immigration Administration

Copyright© www.fmpre.gov.cn
Address: 2 Chaoyangmen Nandajie, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100701 Tel: 86 - 10 - 65961114

https://www.fmpre.gov.cn/eng/wjbzhd/202409/t20240929_11499995.html 6/6
