FINAL

Commonwealth of Dominica

Statement by

Her Excellency Sylvanie Burton, DAH
President of the Commonwealth of Dominica

On the Occasion of the 79" Session of the

United Nations General Assembly

Theme: “Leaving No One Behind: Acting Together for
the Advancement of Peace, Sustainable
Development, and Human Dignity for Present
and Future Generations”

Wednesday, 25" September 2024
United Nations Headquarters
New York
FINAL

Mr. President,

Mabrika! Mabrika! I greet you in the language of my
Kalinago people, the first people of the Caribbean

whom I am proud to call my ancestors.

I proudly bring you warmest greetings from the
citizens of the Nature Island of the Caribbean and the
homeland of Olympian Gold Medalist, Thea Lafond-
Gadson, the Commonwealth of Dominica. It is an
extraordinary honour to address this august body in
my capacity as the first female President of the
Commonwealth of Dominica and as the first

President of indigenous descent.
FINAL

Mr. President,

Our organization was born out of the need to enable
dialogue and facilitate cooperation among its
members to avoid international conflict. Over time,
however, our understanding of human development's
contribution to peacebuilding and civilization has
improved to the point where cooperation to enhance
the human condition now lies at the core of our

organization’s work.

Mr. President,

Progress in many spheres of human endeavor is not
equitable, and deliberate action is required to ensure,
that the most vulnerable among us, namely women,

boys, girls, the physically challenged and senior
FINAL

citizens are brought from the shadows of neglect and

into the light of opportunity.

In essence, Excellencies, though we are a small nation
subject to the many challenges of growth and
development, we insist that we continue to be our
brothers' keeper and join our voice with those who
believe that no one, regardless of location, race,
ethnicity, gender, or religion — no one — is left behind
in the relentless pursuit of advancement. To leave no
one behind in our quest for a sustainable and resilient
future, we must embrace multilateralism to combat

the many major global challenges we face.

The Sustainable Development Goals 2030 Agenda

4
FINAL

Mr. President,

We remain concerned that despite the resources and
publicity given to UN Agenda 30, its outputs so far do
not inspire confidence that we are on track to realize

the much-heralded goals.

Alarmingly, the 2024 Sustainable Development Goals
Report indicates that far from building on the
progress achieved during the first five years, “fully
half of the 17 targets are showing minimal or
moderate progress” while “over one-third appear

stalled or going in reverse’.

It is, therefore, the hope of my Government and the

Caribbean Community of which we are proud
FINAL

members, that this Assembly will be known as the
forum, at which the United Nations family rededicated
itself to ensuring that the SDGs remain central to our
claim, that our civilizations are caring and progressive
and that our collective management, scientific and
diplomatic capabilities will be assigned to ensuring
that the well-being of the present and future

generations is guaranteed.

Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs)

Mr. President,
FINAL

For example, despite SDG 3, Good Health and
Wellbeing, the growing burden of Non-Communicable
Diseases (NCDs), is an urgent crisis that calls for a

unified and aggressive approach by all global leaders.

The World Health Organization (WHO), concludes
that NCDs such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes,
hypertension, cancers and _ chronic _ respiratory

diseases, account for 75% of all deaths worldwide.

These diseases not only shorten individual lives but
also imperil the future of our societies, our economies,
and our shared global development goals. The fight
against NCDs is not one that any nation, particularly
a nation as small as ours, can win alone. That fight
requires strong leadership, innovative strategies, and

collaboration at every level.
FINAL

In Dominica, we have made significant progress in
enhancing our healthcare system, to better meet the

needs of those at risk or living with NCDs.

I had the opportunity to share Dominica’s
perspective, vision and action on non-communicable
diseases with the Global Group of Heads of State and
Government for the Prevention and Control of Non-
Communicable Diseases, at their Third Annual
Gathering held here yesterday at the UN
Headquarters. Dominica is proud to play its part in
this global effort, and we remain committed to
working with international partners to share
knowledge, resources, and best practices in the fight

against NCDs.

Climate Change

Mr. President,
FINAL

Mr. President, we stand today at a critical juncture in
human history. Climate change, as we know, is not
just an environmental challenge; it is a threat to every

aspect of life as we know it.

For Dominica, as for many Small Island Developing
States, this is not a distant or abstract issue; it is a

daily reality.

We have said it time and time again. We see it so
vividly, year after year, that our communities are on
the frontlines, facing intensified hurricanes,

devastating floods, and prolonged droughts.

We recall our own devastation in 2015 with Tropical
Storm Erika which wiped out 96% of Dominica’s GDP,
and then again in 2017 against the deadly Hurricane
Maria which destroyed over 225% of Dominica’s GDP
in a matter of hours. Mere hours! That is why, this
year, we watched in agony as Hurricane Beryl swept
through the island-States of St Vincent & the

Grenadines, Grenada, Barbados, and Jamaica.
FINAL

Mr. President, these tragic occurrences embolden us
to state firmly that the time for rhetoric has long
passed. Business as usual, simply will not suffice.
We need urgent, bold, and decisive action to limit
global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius, as science

clearly dictates.

But to do this, we must drastically reduce emissions,
boldly honor financial commitments, and build
critical resilience infrastructure in regions

particularly vulnerable in relation to climate change.

This is a moral imperative, a matter of the utmost
urgency, a matter of climate justice. Our very future

depends on the decisions made in these halls.

Excellencies:
This Assembly is meeting at a time when the

Commonwealth of Dominica and the rest of the

10
FINAL

Caribbean direct our gaze to the east and on the
storms and hurricanes that emerge in the Atlantic.

There is no denial that climate change is happening.
We see. Indeed, we feel its disastrous impacts on a
daily basis. Already the warnings of weather
scientists regarding global warming and_ the
consequent increase in frequency and severity of

storms, have proved to be accurate.

The Government and People of Dominica stand in
solidarity with our sister CARICOM nations and

others adversely affected by this year's storms.

Dominica along with other Caribbean States have
already prioritized the development of national

climate adaptation strategies; invested in resilient

11
FINAL

infrastructure and _é agriculture, invested in
community education and in renewable energy.

Still, the reality is that, as important as our
interventions in this crucial space are, they will
remain ineffective if our friends and partners in the
industrialized world do not’ honour _ their
commitments, to reduce global warming and provide
the funding that is required, to enable our low-

emitting States to become resilient.

We therefore seize this opportunity to again urge that
the ethical pledges made via the Kyoto Protocol, the
Paris Agreement, the Climate Action Summit and
within the framework of the Green Climate Fund, be

honoured in the interest of the global community.

12
FINAL

Prime Minister Honourable Dr. Roosevelt Skerrit has
been sounding that call at every opportunity he gets.
We are sounding that call again at this Assembly.
The high-emitting countries need to recognize and
accept responsibility for their destructive practices
and do the noble thing. We will not relent until they

do!

Mr. President,
Our world is at the crossroads. Now, more than ever,

Leadership at every level matters.

My delegation is of the firm view that the fundamental
principles of the UN charter must be respected, no

13
FINAL

matter which Member State may be under scrutiny.
Mr. President, this is no source of joy to my
delegation, but these critical times demand that

important truths be spoken frankly.

Mr. President, a glaring hypocrisy clouds this august
body when right seems to pass as wrong, wrong
seems to pass as right, depending on which Member
State is being impacted. This practice of might makes

right must be discontinued!

Global Peace

Mr. President,

My delegation remains deeply concerned about the
ongoing conflicts particularly in Ukraine, the Middle
East, and Sudan among others. We recognize the

14
FINAL

crucial role of peace in human development. We are

convinced that war is futile.

It is this conviction that impels us to urge that the
fullest support be given to those entities that are
engaged in promoting peace and reconciliation in the
Middle East, Ukraine, and Sudan, just a few examples
of locations where war is setting back the human

development gains achieved over the years.

The continuing loss of innocent lives, particularly the
innocent lives of the most vulnerable amongst us,
namely the innocent lives of women and children is of

dire concern. There is no winner in these conflicts.

15
FINAL

And if history has taught us anything, it is that the
cost to rebuild after such terrifying and inhumane
conflicts is extremely prohibitive. To this end, as long
as these conflicts persist, my delegation will not cease
to echo the call for an urgent end to these conflicts
which have decimated the lives of so many innocent

ones.

Haiti

Mr. President,

We stand in solidarity with the people of Haiti and
insist with the other CARICOM Member States, that
the current crisis being confronted by our sister
CARICOM State in no way nullifies the entitlement of

its people to the recognition of their sacred

16
FINAL

sovereignty and their right to be central in the search

for a fair and durable peace.

The Government of Dominica remains convinced that
the present challenges faced by our sister CARICOM
State are in part related to the glorious contribution
Haiti made to the quest for justice and freedom in our
region and the world.

Indeed, the current complexion of this august body

would have been unimaginable without the heroic

struggles of the Haitian people.

As such, the crisis in Haiti is much more than a
Caribbean crisis even if the solution is an obligation
that all of the Caribbean States accept
wholeheartedly. My delegation therefore unreservedly

17
FINAL

supports the position of CARICOM on the situation in
Haiti, a position that rightly calls for a Haitian-led-
and-owned transition process to bring across
systematic changes to our fellow CARICOM Member

State. It is high time!

The heroic sacrifices of Haitian blood and treasure
that opened the door to the liberation of so many of
our countries, making it possible for us to be
Members of this august body, deserve no less than
the abundant peace and prosperity of the wonderful

Haitian people.

It is, Mr. President, in this same spirit that we
welcome the installation of the interim Government

under the leadership of Dr. Gary Conille, and the

18
FINAL

swearing-in of a new cabinet of Minsters, on June

12th,

This process of normalization of life for the people of
Haiti has been nothing if not daunting. However, with
the support of the International Community, there is
a glimmer of hope, the dawning of a new day, as
progress is being made. We remain ever optimistic
that ordinary Haitian citizens will once again be able
to live, work, and feel at peace in Haiti; an outcome

they so richly deserve.

Mr. President,

No mention of this glimmer of hope for the Haitian
people would be complete without recognition of the
strategic support of the Kenyan volunteers, who have

19
FINAL

played a major role in bringing the security situation

under some measure of control.

The Kenyan people standing so closely in the struggle
for peace and prosperity with the Haitian people is as
natural as natural gets because their stance echoes
the ancestral and historical connections that we
share as well as the imposition history placed upon
us to struggle for our liberation. We, therefore, thank
the Government and people of Kenya for their mighty
effort. We thank also the United States of America and
Canada for their generous support for the effort to

stabilize Haiti.

We also thank the other States which have made and

pledged their support to Haiti towards the restoration

20
FINAL

of an environment conducive to peace and
development. Recognition is also due to those who
made material contributions to this effort. We urge
Member States who have pledged financial support to
honor those pledges so that the humanitarian gaps

can be closed, and the food crisis can be resolved.

The Haitian people, a people as heroic and resilient as
people ever were, deserve better. It is our firm
conviction that we in the International Community
have a responsibility to ensure that the living
conditions of the Haitian people are brought to the

natural standards of human dignity.

21
FINAL

Cuba

Mr. President,

The Commonwealth of Dominica is keen to
underscore its commitment to advocating for unity,
justice, peace and the sustainable human

development that they foster.

In this regard, we continue to urge that the long-
running economic embargo against the people of
Cuba be set aside. It hurts the people of Cuba as well

as the image of its sponsors.

The trade embargo imposed against our brothers and

sisters in Cuba, continues to be of great concern to us

in the Caribbean. Its lifting grows increasingly urgent.

22
FINAL

Therefore, the Commonwealth of Dominica once again
joins the voices of the overwhelming majority of
members of this global organization, to call for the
immediate lifting of trade restrictions and export bans
imposed on the good people of Cuba.

They are unjustified! They are unjustifiable! They are
antiquated! They belong to a bygone era. They should
cease to exist. They fall, in our view, within the grand
narrative of yet another Caribbean people’s struggle
for liberation. It is for these reasons that the
Government of Dominica strongly urges a radical

reconsideration of these actions.

Venezuela

Mr. President,

23
FINAL

Our steadfast advocacy for respect for the United
Nations norms of sovereignty and non-interference
impels us as well to urge that the right of the
Government and people of Venezuela to resolve
internal challenges without outside interference be
respected. We renew our condemnation of the United
States’ imposition of sanctions on Venezuela. The
resulting hardship forced upon the people of

Venezuela needs an immediate and complete end.

Kalinago Contribution

Mr. President:

24
FINAL

In closing, my delegation is pleased to leave this
august body, with reference to a most valuable and

appropriate gift for this forum at this point in time.

My ancestors, the Kalinago people, lived in harmony
with Mother Nature, drawing on nature for food and
general wellbeing, including medicinal products.
The benefits to a life in harmony with Mother Nature
are many.

Their impact on the environment was minimal. The
benefits to human health were long active lives, with
minimal burden of chronic diseases.

My ancestors also lived a communal life marked by
social cohesion. My delegation recommends this way

of life, of our Kalinago people, to this body.

25
FINAL

Mr. President,

I wish Your Excellency and all the Delegations
participating in this 79t Session, every success in

their deliberations.

In the language of the Kalinago people, Ayohora

Ayahora, which means thank you.

I Thank you for the courtesy of your attention.

26
