Check Against Delivery

Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, Esteemed Colleagues, Ladies and
Gentlemen, Dear Friends of my country,

It is a great honor to be with you today to address so many different nations
of the world.

We are a government that believes Georgia inherently deserves to be a
peaceful, stable, and developed country. With this in mind, over the last
decade, we have ensured that Georgia develops along this trajectory. We
have made some tough choices, and were never afraid of the challenge.
We never chose an easy path and we always prioritized our nation and our
people. As a result, we are reclaiming our nations’ pride — the pride and
dignity that a country with 3,000 years of history deserves.

We gather here in times of unprecedented global challenges, when
interlinking crises of escalating conflicts, climate change, and rising
humanitarian needs remain complex. These challenges require bold
actions. Georgia has never been afraid of bold actions. The last couple of
years have been difficult for our region. While we should be concentrating
on global challenges, such as development and problem-solving, the
ongoing war in Ukraine has caused an unprecedented level of uncertainty
and a humanitarian crisis. I would like to underline once again: Georgia’s
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders remains firm and unwavering.

Understanding the firsthand importance of peace, we have led the effort
to transform our immediate South Caucasus region from a region of
conflicts into a region of opportunities. We welcome the process of
peaceful settlement between Armenia and Azerbaijan, and in particular,
the efforts aimed at normalizing relations with neighboring countries. We
have been, and are, willing to provide a regional cooperation format that
will support collaboration and trust-building between countries, to make
sure differences are left in the past, and that we move forward together to
capitalize on all the resources and advantages our region has to offer the
world.

Georgia’s strategic location, serving as a natural bridge between Europe
and Asia, makes Georgia the shortest route between East and West. With
our sea access and strong relations with China as well as Central Asian
countries, Georgia is a key player in the regional and broader Eurasian
context. We are a hub not only for the exchange of goods, but also for
energy transit and much more. Georgia ensures that seven landlocked
countries of the South Caucasus and Central Asia are connected with the
rest of the world via our port infrastructure, which we are committed to
further developing with the soon-to-commence Anaklia Deep Sea Port
Construction.

If we look at the political map, Georgia is the single safest and most reliable
transit route to ensure the timely and efficient movement of goods and
services. Our commitment to maintaining and enhancing our role as a
reliable transit corridor ensures we are able to support our strategic
partners in Europe with their energy security needs. By diversifying supply
routes and investing in robust infrastructure, Georgia can offer additional
predictability in East-West connectivity, especially within the framework
of the Middle Corridor Initiative.

As we all know, the last couple of years have brought significant
challenges. Despite these multiple tests, Georgia has demonstrated
remarkable resilience to such external shocks. Our average annual
economic growth since 2021 has been 9.7%. Thanks to strong

2
macroeconomic fundamentals and fiscal discipline, the government debt
and fiscal deficit declined to 39.3% and 2.5%, respectively. Additionally,
Georgia has maintained one of the lowest regional inflation rates, further
showcasing its economic stability.

Despite significant economic improvement and cutting the poverty rate in
half over the last 10 years, further reducing poverty and inequality is at the
heart of Georgia’s socio-economic development agenda. In 2023, the
employment rate showed significant improvement, coinciding with an
increase in the labor force participation rate. The positive trend continued
in the first half of 2024 as well, when the unemployment rate decreased to
a record low of 13.7%.

Georgia’s effective performance is duly reflected in international rankings
from the world’s most reputable agencies:

- The "Global Competitiveness Survey" by the World Economic Forum
ranks Georgia 20th in the world and 11th in Europe in terms of
Corruption Control; while in terms of Rule of Law, Georgia ranks
29th in the world and 14th in Europe;

- The International Budget Partnership’s Open Budget Survey ranks
Georgia as Number One in terms of Budget Transparency globally;

- “Transparency in the Time of War” by the European Research Centre
for Anti-Corruption and State-Building placed Georgia 17th in its
2023 ranking, ahead of 15 EU member states and four G7 states;

- Additionally, Georgia is the 25th freest economy in the world
according to Fraser Institute’s Economic Freedom of the World
report, once again ahead of many leading economies;

- The Heritage Foundation's Index of Economic Freedom ranks
Georgia 19th in Europe and 32nd globally, once again ahead of many
EU countries;
- According to the OECD FDI Regulatory Restrictiveness Index,
Georgia ranked 8th among more than 80 countries as one of the most
open economies in the world in terms of attracting investments.
That’s the reason why Georgia's FDI-to-GDP ratio is one of the
highest among peer countries. FDI in 2023 amounted to 1.9 billion
USD, representing 6.2% of GDP. In the post-pandemic period until
now, Georgia has attracted 6.2 billion USD in FDI, further
supplementing Georgia’s transformation into a regional multi-
functional hub that serves all things business.

Even though we hosted more than seven million tourists last year, showing
a strong bounce back in post-COVID recovery, Georgia still maintains one
of the lowest crime rates globally. According to Numbeo, Georgia ranks
8th in Europe and 21st globally, thanks to our law enforcement agencies
and professionals.

Despite the fact that 20% of our territories are under illegal occupation, we
continue to thrive, continue to grow, and continue to make sure that our
children live in a better, stronger, and more dignified Georgia. We are
diligent and tireless in our quest to make sure Georgia is a country that
every citizen is proud of.

I want to use this opportunity to address our people on the other side of
occupation line, in the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions. Whatever actions
we take are done to help our people so that one day, with our children, we
can live together in one happy, united, and developed Georgia. On this
side of the occupation line, we will always meet you with an open heart.
We have to re-build all the broken bridges in our country.

Dear Colleagues and Friends of my country;
In conclusion, Georgia is at a pivotal point in its modern history, and we
as the government of the people are determined to guide our country in
the best interests of the nation, to make sure we overcome all our
challenges and become stronger and more successful than ever before. We
are optimistic that Georgia’s desire to become a full-fledged member of the
European Union will be achieved by 2030.

As we look ahead to the future with a commitment to shaping a prosperous
community together with our allies and partners, our united efforts will
persist in supporting peace-building measures and _ sustainable
development. In doing so, we will advance human dignity, not only for the
citizens of Georgia today, but also for the wellbeing of all future
generations to come.
