UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY ADDRESS 2024

Monsieur Le President, heads of Government and State, ladies and

gentlemen,

This is the sixth occasion on which | have addressed the United
Nations General Assembly as Greece’s Prime Minister. But it is the
first in which | stand before you as the leader of a country which is an
incoming member of the United Nations Security Council.

Greece is honored to accept that responsibility, for the third time, and
| am personally grateful for the trust of the broader UN membership
has placed in our candidacy for the 2025/26 term.

Three words of Greek origin, but of universal meaning, will guide
Greece’s upcoming tenure on the Security Council: Dialogue,
Diplomacy, and Democracy.

Six core priorities underpin those guiding principles: the peaceful
settlement of disputes; respect for International Law and the rules and
principles of the UN Charter; women, peace and security; climate,
peace and security; children in armed conflict; and of course, as a

seafaring nation, maritime security.
Ladies and gentlemen,

Addressing you today 12 months on from last time round in
September 2023, | don’t think any of us can claim we are somehow
better off now than we were back then. If anything, our world grows
less secure by the day.

Whether it be escalating conflicts, geopolitical division, the climate
crisis, mass migration, rising inequality, even the unchecked rise of
Artificial Intelligence, these challenges jeopardize our present and our
future. And yet within these challenges lie unique opportunities to
transform the way we live, govern, and cooperate on a global scale.

We are at an inflection point. What happens next, depends to a high
degree on international cooperation. It is here, in this Chamber, where
we represent the collective voice of the international community, that

we are called to act for the good of the entire humanity.

To do that effectively we must reinvigorate and strengthen the
multilateral system. We have all agreed on the need to reform the UN,
and especially the Security Council.
Since it first sat in 1946, the UN Security Council has not undergone
any significant institutional reform. In that sense it is the relic of a
world that no longer exists. Back then it was fit to address the
challenges and opportunities of the post Second World War world but
today it is not fit to solve the complex problems of the present.

On the Security Council reform, | believe we all agree it is essential to
increase the meaningful participation of underrepresented regions.
Nearly a third of the UN member states have never sat on the Security
Council.

In addition, the enlargement of the Security Council must include both
non-permanent and permanent members. New permanent members
must include leading countries from all Continents. The composition
of the Security Council should reflect the geopolitical and economic
realities of the third decade of the 21°' century, not the fifth decade of
the 20".

Ladies and gentlemen,

In the Security Council, Greece will do its utmost to act as a stabilizing
actor. That work begins in our immediate neighborhood. After all, as
a gateway to Europe, North Africa and the Middle East, Greece sits
less than 900 miles away from both Gaza and Ukraine.
Ayear ago, we did not know that on October 7 a horrific terrorist attack
would leave 1.200 innocent civilians, men, women and children
massacred, around 250 people would be taken as hostages or that in
the war that ensued and over 42.000 people would perish, so far.

The ongoing violence in the Middle East is grave and civilians’
horrendous suffering in Gaza is continuing. Escalation threatens to

trigger a full-scale war in the region.

Greece calls on all parties — including Iran and those it has influence
over — to back away from perpetuating the current destructive cycle of
violence, to lower tensions and engage constructively in the pursuit of

meaningful de-escalation.

A full-scale war in Southern Lebanon must be avoided at all cost.
People on both sides of the border have a right to live peacefully
without the threat of rockets or bombs shattering their lives. Greece

fully supports the proposal for an immediate 21 day ceasefire.
In the wake of the October 7" attacks, Greece has always and will
always support Israel’s legitimate right to defend itself. But how it does

so matters.

We must see the immediate return of all remaining hostages.
There must be an immediate ceasefire in Gaza. The humanitarian
catastrophe there cannot go on. The killing must stop. Safe access to
food, water, shelter, clothing and medicines throughout the territory

must be ensured. International humanitarian law must be respected.

However remote, however impossible it may seem today, Israelis and
Palestinians must be given the chance to live side by side in peace

and security.

There is no other way than to make the two-state solution a reality.
There is an absolute need to give Palestinians hope for the future.
This is a sine qua non for peace, stability and security in the region,
including the long-term security of Israel.

Building a fully functioning and sovereign Palestinian state will take
concerted efforts by the sides involved, the actors in the wider region
and the international community as a whole. But there is no other

option to bring about lasting peace in this turbulent region.
Ladies and gentlemen,

A year ago, we were already in the second year of Russia’s illegal war
in Ukraine.

Since February 2022, Russia has brought violence, misery and
destruction back to the European continent. Tens of thousands have
been killed and millions have been displaced from their homes. The
impact on civilian infrastructure and peoples’ lives and livelihoods is

colossal.

We stand in solidarity with the Ukrainian people who are fighting for
their freedom and independence, and for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of their country. Respect for the territorial integrity of all
states is the fundamental pillar of International Law and the
cornerstone of the UN Charter.

In June, at the Summit on Peace in Ukraine, Greece stood shoulder
to shoulder with many other UN member states, calling for a just and
lasting peace in Ukraine, in full respect of Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized

borders.
From the first hours of the Russian aggression the European Union
and its member states rose to the occasion, providing every possible
support to Ukrainians. And we are committed to continue to do so.
Why? Asimple answer: the war in Ukraine is not simply another “local”
European conflict.

It is a brutal challenge to international stability and the international
rules-based order that the UN stands for. As such it concerns the
entire global community. Needless to also recall the very concrete
impact this war has had on International Food security, affecting
economies and basic needs of populations around the world, and
especially in Africa.

Ladies and gentlemen,

Greece has been placed by geography in a_ complicated

neighborhood and | have spoken repeatedly from this stand on the
difficult and at times tense relationship with our neighbor Turkiye.
Over the past year, | have met President Erdogan, 6 times, including
our recent meeting on the sidelines of this Assembly a couple of days
ago. Last December, we signed the Athens Declaration, a document
stating our intention to resolve our differences according to the
principles of international law and in the spirit of good neighborly

relations.

We will continue to explore how to improve bilateral relations with
Turkiye. There is potential for increased co-operation to tackle
common challenges, such as climate change and migration. We
continue to keep channels of communication open to diffuse any

tension that may arise.

Greece is willing to work towards resolving the only major outstanding
issue we have with our neighbor: the delimitation of the continental
shelf and the Exclusive Economic Zone in the Aegean and the Eastern
Mediterranean. We have not been able to effectively address this
difference for more that 40 years. But this does not mean that it is

destined to remain unresolved.

And | was glad to hear President Erdogan say that delimitation of
maritime zones in accordance with international law is to the common

interest of the entire region of the East Mediterranean.
| strongly believe that we have today a window of opportunity and we
should be bold and wise enough to seize this chance. But if we are to
try, we should both adopt a consistent approach in every aspect of our
behavior towards each other.

On the other hand, when it comes to Cyprus, where this year we
marked the 50th anniversary of Turkiye’s illegal invasion and
subsequent occupation of over a third of the territory of the Republic
of Cyprus, we see no progress in Turkiye’s position. This invasion was
and remains a violation of the fundamental principles of the UN
Charter.

As Prime Minister of Greece, | reaffirm here today our commitment to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus and to a solution, on
the basis of a Bizonal, Bicommunal Federation. With a single
sovereignty, a single citizenship and a single international personality,
in accordance with the relevant UN Security Council Resolutions.

A two-state solution cannot and will not be acceptable; it is not a
solution. President Christodoulides gave yesterday from this podium
an impassionate and sincere address, recalling the violence and

trauma of the Cyprus invasion 50 years ago.
He also expressed his unwavering commitment to engaging in order
to find a solution. | for one have absolute trust in this commitment. He
is right to argue that International Law cannot be applied a la carte

and that history cannot be rewritten or erased.

Greece fully supports the efforts of the Secretary General for the
resumption of negotiations within this framework. We call upon
Turkiye and the Turkish-Cypriot Community to come to the negotiating
table, to establish mutual trust, and to engage in a frank discussion in
pursuit of a mutually acceptable, just and viable settlement.

Can you imagine how powerful a message for the world community it
would send, to all those seeking peace in seemingly intractable
conflicts around the world, if we can find a permanent, viable and just

solution to the Cyprus question?

Ladies and gentlemen,

Let me also mention the other side of our neighborhood and its future,
the Western Balkans.
As the oldest European Union member in the region, Greece has
always had a vision for the Western Balkans inside the European
Union family. A vision that would reduce tension and conflict, and
embed the rule of law and fundamental freedoms, driving
development and prosperity for its people.

There has been progress, but that progress has not been enough. 21
years after the Thessaloniki agenda, significant challenges remain.
Allow me to be very frank: the countries of the Western Balkans need
to take the definitive decision to leave behind the traumatic legacy of
the past.

And the political leadership of the Western Balkans needs to choose
-by action- to embrace their European future. By improving
democratic governance, consolidating the Rule of Law and freedom
of expression, pursuing difficult internal reforms and- very importantly-

committing to good-neighborly relations.

Reviving nationalist narratives and agendas should have no place
today in a region on the cusp of joining the EU. Let’s start with the
basics: international agreements must be respected and implemented
fully and in good faith, whether we are talking about Dayton, or Prespa
or the Belgrade-Pristina Agreements.
There are disruptors who would like nothing more than to cause new
divisions in this sensitive corner of Europe. It is time to relegate the
famous phrase of Winston Churchill that “the Balkans produce more
history than they can consume” once and for all to the history books.

Ladies and gentlemen,

Let me conclude by addressing two issues critical to our shared future:
the advent of Artificial Intelligence and, the adverse effects of digital
technology, especially on our children.

The power of Al seems limitless. A technology with the potential to
change our world in a way that will probably surpass the advent of the
personal computer, the launch of the mobile phone or the birth of the
World Wide Web.

Like steam or electricity before it, Al as a general technology presents
huge opportunity to transform for good the way we live, collaborate
and progress as humankind.

If used correctly, it could very well be driving solutions across science,
climate change, R&D, medicine.
For our Governments, Al has enormous power to enhance
productivity, facilitate more effective decision making, and deliver
more efficient and higher impact public services. It is a game changer.

However, Al also has the potential to do extraordinary harm.

Unchecked, and in the hands of malign actors, Al could yet become a
weapon of control in an uncertain world order. We are already seeing
how generative Al is used to create more and more convincing deep
fakes and content designed to spread misinformation and

disinformation.

It is not lost on me, standing here, in this assembly, created to protect
peace and security and promote global dialogue, that our world is
being shaped by transnational actors in the form of a few technology
companies, with more economic muscle than most of countries

represented here.

This is leading to an imbalance that we must address. Those driving
the technologies that are fundamentally re-shaping the societies are
not accountable, and that needs to change. They, like us, in the end

have a responsibility towards humanity.
Unlike with climate change, where we continue to convene globally to
discuss national contributions within the context of a global problem,
with Al there no such framework. The European Union is trying to
rectify that, but, just as with climate, the EU cannot address this

challenge alone.

And here | would like to praise the final report “Governing Al for
Humanity” presented just a few days ago by the High-Level Advisory
Body on Al established by the Secretary General. The
recommendations of this Report can truly contribute to an agile and
adaptable regime of global governance of Al that helps to showcase

the benefits of Al and address its risks.

Bluntly, if both the Compact for the Future and a Global Digital
Compact we agreed this week, are to have effect, then we may need
to put the regulation and application of Al on a global footing.
Eventually, what we may need is COP for Al with the participation not

just of countries but also of the global technology companies.

This is an issue of the outmost urgency for one additional reason. We
are already witnessing the adverse effects of digital technology and

Al driven algorithms on the mental health of our children.
It took over a quarter of a century for campaigners to install seat belts
in cars, despite the fact that all the evidence pointed to belts saving
lives. We are in a similar situation today when it comes to children and
teenagers and their use of digital and social media platforms.

Every day, children around the world are being exposed to content
that exacerbates feelings of loneliness, and unrealistic standards of
beauty. Frequently, our teenagers are pulled into extremist eco-
chambers. Bullying, once contained to the real-world, now has its
virtual twin. It follows children home from school and materialises on

phones and tablets in bedrooms.

Social media algorithms are constantly improved by Al to keep
children online for the maximum amount of time and away from the

real world of unsupervised play. All for the purpose of making money.

Countless studies have shown that heavy use of social media is linked
to depression, feelings of isolation, sleep deprivation and addiction.
The brains of our children are being rewired and their development
changed at an almost unimaginable scale. Yet we do nothing.

That is why | applaud initiatives such as the one announced by
Australia for putting an age limit on social media use, with age
verification technologies that cannot be circumvented.
Others should follow suit. Technology companies must come to the
table and show that they will take tangible and measurable action to
prioritise safety over profits. If they don’t, pragmatic solutions like
banning devices in our schools — which Greece has implemented as
of this year - will be complemented by harsher regulatory responses.

Digital technology is no different than any other industry that needs to
operate under health and safety regulations. The overarching
principle, the golden standard, is one and the same: Do No Harm.

Ladies and gentlemen,

We live in a rapidly changing world. We cannot let our differences be
an excuse for inaction. As Greece takes its seat on the Security
Council, we do so mindful of the importance of our core principles:

Dialogue, Diplomacy and Democracy.

This week’s Summit of the Future demonstrates what is truly possible
when we work together to renew multilateral cooperation through
those principles.

In reiterating the commitment of all member states to the core values
of the UN Charter we can still galvanize international resolve and
forge innovative partnerships to address both the world’s current and
emerging challenges.
Greece stands ready to help the United Nations do its part in the year
ahead.

Thank you.
