1 AS DELIVERED

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS
OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA
AT THE
79" SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
GENERAL DEBATE
NEW YORK, 28 SEPTEMBER 2024

Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,
Mr. President,

This is my last opportunity, as the Foreign Minister of Indonesia
to represent my country to speak before the UNGA.

Adecade of so many challenges but at the same time, a decade
of Indonesia’s many contributions in addressing global issues.

One of them is Palestine.

Indonesia cannot, | repeat cannot, sit back and relax seeing the
injustice that continues to be committed against the people of
Palestine.

Indonesia is and will always stand with the people of Palestine
to attain their right to have an independent state of Palestine.

As | speak now more than 41 thousand people in Gaza have
been killed, situation in West Bank Lebanon are deteriorating.

Is that not enough?

Will the Security Council only take action to stop Israel’s
atrocities.

When all Palestinian are displaced?

Or when one hundred thousand Palestinians are killed?
Or when a regional armed conflict breaks out?

That will be too late!

PM Netanyahu yesterday mentioned and | quote:

That “Israel seeks peace...”
2 AS DELIVERED

That “Israel yearns for peace...”
Really?
How are we supposed to believe that statement?

Yesterday, while he was here, Israel conducted unprecedented
massive air-attacks on Beirut.

PM Netanyahu wants the war to continue...
We must stop that...| repeat we must stop that.

We must pressure Israel to come back to a political solution for
two-state solution.

President,

The overwhelming majority of the UN members strongly support
the two-state solution.

This is the right time to walk the talk.

Recognizing the State of Palestine is the least that we can do
now, to give Palestinian equal footing on the world’s stage & to
exert pressure to Israel to stop their atrocities.

Therefore, | urge countries that have yet to recognize the State
of Palestine to do so now.

If every each one of us does it, for sure it will give impact.

The recognition of Palestine today is an investment that would
yield a more peaceful, just and humane world tomorrow.

Once again, Indonesia urges the Permanent Members of the
Security Council to concretely act, to immediately stop Israel
from blatantly violating international law & to end Israeli impunity.

The mandate of the Security Council is to maintain peace, to
create peace, not to maintain and prolong wars, or even worse
to support the perpetrator of atrocities.

Inaction means complicity.
Colleagues,
3 AS DELIVERED

Wherever Indonesia goes we carry the voices of the Global
South.

Indonesia started this commitment in 1955 when Indonesia
hosted the Asia-Africa Conference in Bandung, Indonesia.

The Bandung Spirit of equality, cooperation and solidarity will
always be alive to inspire the Global South to gain their rights
including their right to development.

That is the spirit that we need, If we want to have a global
leadership where moral virtues are the compass of our business.

Do not bury the Principles of the UN Charter and international
law-under the rubble of double standards, trust deficit & zero-
sum game.

Mr. President,
Excellencies...

Against these global challenges Indonesia continues to be part
of the solution. By embodying this commitment, Indonesia’s
presidency in 2022 managed to prevent the G20 from collapsing
despite deep geopolitical division.

During the global pandemic, we led the establishment of the
Pandemic Fund & co-chaired the COVAX AMC Engagement
Group to ensure equitable access to vaccines and financial
resource & safeguard health security for all especially for the
Global South.

As a member of the Human Rights Council Indonesia
continuously calls for inclusive partnerships in addressing global
human rights issues.

And amidst regional rivalries Indonesia pioneered the ASEAN
Outlook on the Indo-Pacific as a framework for concrete and
inclusive cooperation, to embrace not to contain.

We have demonstrated that global leadership will never be
attained through force domination & fear.
4 AS DELIVERED

Global leadership should be about guiding collective actions by
listening, empowering collaboration, & instilling hope. This is
what | say “Leadership... without hegemony.”.

Mr. President,
Excellencies...

To attain this vision, we must focus on three _key priorities:
First, advancing peace through inclusive leadership.
Multilateral system should be reformed.

The UNSC must be an inclusive space for peace, where a wider
range of voices can be heard and timely decisions can be taken
for our collective good.

Without peace our efforts to attain global goals such as the SDGs
will remain a dream without reality.

Indonesia is committed to contribute to global peace by being
one of the largest troop-contributing countries in UN
peacekeeping missions & remain firm in our pro-active role to
counter-terrorism.

We also strive to ensure that the peace we are promoting will be
inclusive by advancing the Women, Peace and Security agenda,
contributing to women empowerment, including pursuing equal
access to education to women and girls in Afghanistan.

Investing in women is investing in peace.
Empowering women is empowering prosperity for all.
Second, ensure a resilient future for shared prosperity.

Indonesia believes in a future where all nations thrive no matter
how big or small.

But the global pandemic and impacts of climate change has
shown us all that to prosper together we must work together.

Therefore, the implementation of the Pact for the Future is
important to accelerate the achievement of the SDGs & scale up
partnership and sustainable development even beyond 2030.
5 AS DELIVERED

At the same time geopolitical tensions have also significantly
impacted global supply chains affecting the development
trajectory of the Global South, many of whom remain unable to
freely exercise their right to development.

In this context, Indonesia has taken proactive steps.

Earlier this month Indonesia held the 2"? Indonesia-Africa Forum
to enhance cooperation in international supply chains and
connectivity & build collaboration in preparing for the future
challenges.

Indonesia also hosted the 10" World Water Forum this year. We
believe that water is a crucial element for shared prosperity.

Third, building bridges... to foster global collaboration.
Colleagues,

A “winner takes all” “take it or leave it” mentality should no longer
exist when collaboration is the only antidote in addressing the
global challenges of today.

For Indonesia, a world where the only option is us versus them
will only result in a world of us or them.

Global solidarity and collective responsibility are the essence of
the Bandung Spirit.

This spirit guided us through our G20 Presidency in 2022,
Chairmanship of ASEAN in 2023 & continuous efforts to voice
the aspirations of the Global South.

Indonesia envisions a world where nations collaborate together
to address shared challenges, uphold international law & protect
the human rights and dignity of all people.

In Southeast Asia, ASEAN with its 650 million people has proven
that diversity can coexist with stability, peace and prosperity.

Indonesia also continues to work with ASEAN to restore peace
and stability in Myanmar, through the implementation of the
6 AS DELIVERED

ASEAN Five-Point of Consensus & to enable the safe and
dignified return of the Rohingya People.

Beyond ASEAN we also continue to deepen our engagement to
the Pacific region to become part and parcel of an inclusive and
peaceful Indo-Pacific architecture, based on the principles of
solidarity, equality and mutual respect.

Mr President,

Colleagues...

Peace justice and humanity will always be at the core of
Indonesia’s foreign policy.

Indonesia understands that global leadership is not something
that is inherited nor does it fall from the sky.

It must be earned through our collective efforts.
Rest assured that Indonesia’s commitment towards common

peace, common prosperity and common security, will be carried
forward across Indonesia’s successive administrations.

It is in this spirit that | am proud to announce Indonesia’s
candidature for a non-permanent seat on the United Nations
Security Council for 2029-2030.

This candidature reflects our deep commitment to contributing
towards global peace and security.

So colleagues,

Let us work together to build a legacy of peace for future
generations.

| Thank you very, very much.

--000000--
