1672 words
Check against delivery

INDIA STATEMENT

Mr. President,

Excellencies, Distinguished Members of the General

Assembly,

Greetings and Namaskar from 1.4 billion people of

Bharat!

I congratulate the President of the General Assembly
H.E. Mr. Philemon Yang. We strongly support the 79‘

UNGA’s theme of “Leaving no one behind”.

Mr. President,

We are gathered here at a difficult time. The world is
yet to recover from the ravages of the Covid pandemic.
A war in Ukraine is well into its third year. The conflict

in Gaza is acquiring wider ramifications.
Across the Global South, development plans have gone
off the rails and SDG targets are receding. But there is

more.

Unfair trade practices threaten jobs, just as unviable
projects raise debt levels. Any connectivity that flouts
sovereignty and territorial integrity acquires strategic
connotations. Especially when it is not a shared

endeavour.

Technology advancements, long a source of hope, are
now equally a factor of anxiety. Climate events occur
with greater intensity and frequency. Food security is

as worrisome as health security.

In truth, the world stands fractious, polarized and
frustrated. Conversations have become _ difficult;
agreements even more so. This is surely not what the

founders of the UN would have wanted of us.

Almost exactly eight decades ago, the first steps
towards the formation of the UN were taken near here,
at Dumbarton Oaks. Refined thereafter at the Yalta
Conference, they were finally approved in San

Francisco.

The debates of that era centered around how to ensure
world peace, a pre-requisite for global prosperity.
Today, we find both peace and prosperity equally

endangered.

And that, Mr. President, is because trust has eroded
and processes have broken down. Countries have
extracted more from the international system than

they have put in it, enfeebling it in the process.

We see that vividly in every challenge and every crisis.
Reforming multilateralism is, therefore, an

imperative.

The urgency of this call is highlighted by the theme of
this session. Leaving no one behind means advancing
peace, ensuring sustainable development and
strengthening human _ dignity. This cannot’ be
delivered by a UN paralyzed when faced with division,

conflict, terrorism and violence. Nor can it be
advanced if access to fuel, food and fertilizer is

jeopardized.

When capturing markets lacks restraint, it damages
the livelihood and social fabric of others. Evasion of
climate action responsibilities by the developed

undermines the growth prospects of the developing.

Indeed, when resource crunch limits the pursuit of
SDG targets, it is not just economies but human

dignity itself that is imperiled.

If the world is in such a state, this body must ask itself:
how has this come to pass? The problems arise from a
combination of structural shortcomings, political
calculations, naked self-interest and yes, disregard for
those left behind.

It is natural to feel overwhelmed by what we confront
now. After all, there are so many dimensions, different
moving parts, issues of the day and the changing

landscape.

But every change must begin somewhere. And there is

no better place than where it all started. We, the
members of the United Nations, must now seriously

and purposefully address ourselves to that task.

Not because it is a competition for influence or
squabble for positions. But because, if we carry on like
this, the state of the world is only going to get worse.
And that could mean that more of us are going to be

left behind.

As the world contemplates these concerns, India has

sought to respond in a variety of ways.

First, by focusing on the issues of the vulnerable,
women, farmers and youth. And fashioning targeted

policies and initiatives for their betterment.

Assured access to piped water, electricity, cooking gas
and new homes are changing millions of lives. The
gender gap has started to close, be it in health,
education or the work place. Our food producers get

financial support thrice a year at the click of a button.

And a third-term government has made skilling of the

youth its key priority.
Second, by expanding opportunities for employment
and entrepreneurship, including through stronger
training and large-scale financial incentives. 495
million Mudra loans have been given to _ small

businesses in the last decade. 67 % of them by women.

Equally telling, 6.56 million street vendors have
availed 8.85 million Svanidhi loans. This is just in the

last 4 years. 45% beneficiaries are again women.

Third, by creating templates that are replicable
elsewhere. It could be digital delivery or enhancing the
quality of governance and public services. As indeed,
making medicines and health facilities accessible and
affordable.

A digital public infrastructure and a people’s pharmacy
are today examples of what India can readily offer. It
is also an alternative vision where technology is used

to empower, not to dominate.

Fourth, by encouraging the Global South to voice its
shared concerns and come together. To that end, we
have convened three Global South Summits, the most

recent in August 2024.
And fifth, by contributing to the well-being of the
global commons and responding to the pressing needs

of those in distress.

This has ranged from undertaking projects in 78
nations, providing resources to neighbours and
responding to HADR situations, to supplying

medicines and ensuring maritime safety and security.

Given the scale of transformation underway in India,
each of these dimensions underline that the world’s
problems can indeed be tackled. And that by working

together, we can surely create a larger lifting tide.

Mr. President,

In these troubled times, it is necessary to provide hope

and rekindle optimism.

We have to demonstrate that big changes are possible,
and not over a long period. Nothing is more powerful
in this regard than the transformative potential of the

digital.
We have seen its impact in our daily lives in India over
the last decade. It is visible when public benefits, from
nutritional support and housing to energy and health,
are delivered efficiently on a vast scale. Or when small
business loans and farmers’ support are extended

without intermediaries.

In fact, when street vendors and expat workforce
confidently use fintech in their regular transactions.
When services, delivery and benefits move seamlessly

and transparently, less people will be left behind.

That is India’s experience and India’s relevance.

Such leapfrogging possibilities, coupled with people-
centric policies and visionary leadership, can be real

gamechangers.

When India lands on the moon, rolls out its own 5G
stack, dispatches vaccines worldwide, embraces
fintech or houses so many Global Capability Centres,

there is a message here.

Our quest for a ‘Viksit Bharat’ or developed India will

understandably be followed closely.
Mr. President, an important cause of many getting left
behind has been the unfairness of the current
globalization model. Over-concentration of production
has hollowed out many economies, impacting their

employment and social stability.

Democratizing global production, building resilient
supply chains, ensuring trusted digital services, and
espousing an open-source culture all promote
widespread prosperity. There are economic answers,

just as there are social ones.

Mr. President,

The UN has always maintained that peace and
development go hand in hand. Yet, when challenges to
one have emerged, due regard has not been given to
the other.

Clearly, their economic implications for the weak and
vulnerable need to be highlighted. But we must
recognize that conflicts themselves must also be

resolved. The world cannot be fatalistic about the
continuation of violence on large scale, no more than

be impervious to its broader consequences.

Whether it is the war in Ukraine or the conflict in
Gaza, the international community seeks urgent
solutions. These sentiments must be acknowledged

and acted upon.

Mr. President,

The UN is a testimony to the agreed principles and
shared objectives of the world order. Respect for
international law and commitments are among the

foremost in this regard.

If we are to ensure global security and stability, then
it is essential that those who seek to lead, set the right
example. Nor can we countenance egregious violations

of our basic tenets.

Terrorism is antithetical of everything the world
stands for. All its forms and manifestations must be
resolutely opposed. The sanctioning of global
terrorists by the UN should also not be impeded for

political reasons.

10
Mr. President,

Many countries get left behind due to circumstances
beyond their control. But some make _ conscious

choices with disastrous consequences.

A premier example is our neighbour, Pakistan.
Unfortunately, their misdeeds affect others as well,

especially the neighbourhood.

When this polity instils such fanaticism among its
people, its GDP can only be measured in terms of

radicalization and its exports in the form of terrorism.

Today, we see the ills it sought to visit on others
consume its own society. It can’t blame the world; this

is only karma.

Mr. President, a dysfunctional nation coveting the
lands of others must be exposed and countered. We
heard some bizarre assertions from it at this forum
yesterday. So let me make India’s position perfectly

clear.

11
Pakistan’s cross-border terrorism policy will never
succeed. And it can have no expectation of impunity.
On the contrary, actions will certainly have
consequences. The issue to be resolved between us is
now only the vacation of illegally occupied Indian
territory by Pakistan. And the abandonment of

Pakistan’s longstanding attachment to terrorism.

Mr. President,

The global order is inherently pluralistic and diverse.
The UN began with 51 members; we are now 193. The
world has changed profoundly and so have its concerns

and opportunities.

But to address both and indeed to strengthen the order
itself, it is essential that the UN be the central

platform for finding common ground.

And that it certainly cannot be, by remaining

anachronistic.

Large parts of the world cannot be left behind when it
comes to deciding the key issues of our times. An

effective and efficient UN, a more representative UN

12
and a UN fit for purpose in the contemporary era, is

essential.

Let us therefore send out a clear message from this
UNGA session: we are determined not to be left behind.
By coming together, sharing experiences, pooling
resources and strengthening our resolve, we can

change the world for the better.

I thank you, Mr. President.

KREEKK

13
