UNGA79 National Statement

Mr. President,

| extend Jamaica’s congratulations on your election to the leadership of
this distinguished body. You can be assured of our full commitment to the
successful execution of your mandate for the 79" Session. | also
commend your predecessor, Ambassador Dennis Francis of Trinidad and

Tobago, a fellow CARICOM national, for his successful tenure.

We the Member States ofthe United Nations are all facing the same world
of multiple and intersecting challenges. The great difference between us,
however, is our capacity to meet, withstand and recover from the shocks
they bring. If there is one realization we must share, it is that these
challenges cannotbe solved alone. They can only be addressed through

multilateralism, diplomacy and international cooperation.

Jamaica’s economic transition “the little country that can”

Mr. President,

Jamaica is a small island located in the second most climate vulnerable
region in the world. We emerged from a brutal history of slavery and
colonization, achieving political independence a mere 62 years ago. Until
recently, mostof our independenthistory has been characterized by high
levels of poverty, debt and unemployment, and a deteriorating crime

situation. As we chart a course towards sustainable prosperity, however,
we are determined that these characteristics will not define the Jamaica

we bequeath to future generations.

Jamaica has been focusing on building resilience. Our macro-economic
fundamentals today are stronger than they have been atany time over the
last 50 years. Our credit ratings have been upgraded by international
rating agencies and our fiscal credibility has improved. Jamaica is now an

attractive destination for investment.

Overthe last 10 years, in spite of the pandemic, we have more than halved
our debt to GDP ratio, significantly reduced our poverty rate, brought
unemploymentto historic lows and increased our minimum wage by more
than 100%.

Our prudent management of the economy has created fiscal space that
has allowed us to invest more into social welfare, national security, health

and education.

Through our national broadband network project, we have increased
internet penetration to 77% and internet user penetration to 85.1%. We
are closing our domestic digital divide, providing more and better

government services online.

We have also embarked on Jamaica’s largest ever expansion and
upgrade of infrastructure using a mix of pure budgetary financing and

public-private partnerships.
Climate practical realities and climate justice

Mr. President,

These advancements have been hard-won. Our efforthas required social,
political and international partnership, measured policy and prudent

management.

Even as we acknowledge the sacrifices made to enable our
achievements, we recognize that our many successes can be eroded by
exogenous shocks including climate change, which we view as a Clear

and present threat to humanity.

As a Small Island Developing State, Jamaica is severely affected by
higher temperatures, warmer seas, sea-level rise and the increased
intensity and frequency of natural disasters. Hurricane Beryl, which
impacted the Caribbean in July this year, was the earliest Category 5
hurricane on record. Beryl resulted in the dislocation of families and
communities, along with significant damage to infrastructure, houses,
schools and farms. Damage was most severe in our agricultural belt,
wiping outcrops, killing livestock and triggering knock-on effects of higher
food prices and inflation. Our new climate-smart agricultural practices
were no match for the hurricane, as her winds took the panels for solar

powered irrigation pumps and flattened 70% of greenhouses.

We experience almost half of each year in the uncertainty of a hurricane
season. Natural and climate-based disasters continue to set back our
efforts to attain the SDGs and realize sustained, inclusive growth and

development. We have therefore sought to strengthen our ability to

3
respond to, and recover from such disasters through a risk layered

approach to disaster response financing.

Jamaica, therefore, has significantly increased resources to our
Contingency Fund and the National Natural Disaster Reserve Fund. We
have established the National Disaster Fund triggered by measured
impact on GDP and became the first Small Island Developing State to
independently sponsor a catastrophe bond. Additionally, we participate in

the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility.

These mechanisms, however, do not reduce the occurrence of disasters,

nor prevent the disruption, dislocation and destruction they cause.

Mr. President,

It bears repeating that no country can combat the effects of climate
change on its own. Jamaica, therefore, affirms our unwavering
commitment to international cooperation to counter the negative impacts
of climate change and to the pursuit of climate justice. We urge the major
polluting nations to honour their commitments under the Paris Agreement

and to meet their finance obligations.

Furthermore, we welcome the adoption of the Antigua and Barbuda
Agenda for SIDS (ABAS) at the 4" International Conference on Small
Island Developing States. More particularly, Jamaica endorses the calls
for a redoubling of international cooperation and action to accelerate
mitigation and adaptation. All countries must adopt or maintain the target

of limiting global temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius, through
enhanced NDCs, based on the principle of common but differentiated

responsibilities.

Allow me to pause here to congratulate the Government of Antigua and

Barbuda for successfully hosting the Conference.

Jamaica calls on the UN and international financial institutions to adopta
new Climate Finance Goal at COP29. We further call for urgent and
accelerated mobilization of international action and resources. This
includes the full and effective operationalization of the Loss and Damage
Fund, to address issues of responsiveness and scale that are the most
critical for SIDS.

Mr. President,

Jamaica welcomes the adoption of the Multidimensional Vulnerability
Index by the General Assembly last month. We call on our development
partners including multilateral development banks and otherinternational
financial institutions to urgently examine the Index and commence its use.
Rather than considering GNI alone, it accurately takes into account the
structural and environmental vulnerabilities of SIDS. Its use by MDBs will
better align access to, and terms of, financing with supporting these

countries with their developmental needs.

Jamaica also commits to advancing dialogue and cooperation with
stakeholders in the international capital markets to adapt their operations

to the vulnerability- resilience profiles of SIDS.
Improved access to development financing is critical for SIDS, which are

particularly off-track in attaining the SDGs.

Getting the SDGs back on track

Mr. President,

The SDGs were adopted by leaders as a universal clarion call to tackle
poverty, ensure peace, and promote prosperity. Jamaica shares the
concern that, globally, only 17 percent of the SDG targets are on track.
We are proud that Jamaica’s progress is further along and we fully
support and are honoured to co-lead the Secretary-General’s SDG
Stimulus Leaders Group. International cooperation is urgently needed to
drive sustained efforts to tackle structural and systemic issues that
constrain access to development financing. Through our collective
advocacy, we aim to elevate the global agendato ensure no one is left
behind.

We call upon wealthier countries and international financial institutions to
partner with developing countries and redouble their efforts to create and
implement innovative strategies to unlock financing and spur investments
in attaining the SDGs.

The upcoming Fourth International Conference on Financing for
Development presents an opportunity to commit to tangible deliverables
to address the current financing challenges. These include impactful,
practical and meaningful reform of the international financial architecture,
to strengthen the voice and representation of developing countries in
international decision making, and to substantially improve the quantity,

accessibility and affordability of financing for development.
Summit of the Future

Mr. President,

This brings me to the Summit of the Future.

The adoption of the Pact for the Future, the Declaration on Future
Generations and Global Digital Compact signals renewed hope in
multilateralism. The consensus demonstrated our collective resolve to
deliver inclusive and durable solutions to current and emerging global
challenges. With foresight, political will and joint action, we can delivera

better world for future generations.

Jamaica commends the work of Namibia and Germany in their facilitation
of the Pact, and we were honoured to have co-facilitated, together with

the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Declaration on Future Generations.

Cuba

Mr. President

Jamaica believes in leveraging multilateralism to advance sustainable
development, human rights and international peace and security to deliver
results for all the peoples of the word. No country or region should be
excluded from the opportunities to attain the SDGs. Jamaica therefore,
again, joins the call for the discontinuation of the crippling economic,
commercial and financial embargo against our closest Caribbean
neighbour, Cuba. We further call for a cessation of the classification of
Cuba as a state sponsor of terrorism. These measures continue to have
a devastating impact on the economicand social well-being of the people

of Cuba, and preclude progress towards their attainment of the SDGs.
Israel-Palestine Conflict

Jamaica once again condemns the brutal October 7 attacks in Israel and
the devastating counter-attacks in the Palestinian territories. The
undeniable humanitarian crisis and instability compel all parties to resolve
the conflict through dialogue and diplomacy. We commend the United
States, Qatar, Jordan, Egyptand others who are making concerted efforts

towards a peaceful resolution.

We continue to support United Nations Security Council Resolution 242
and believe that a two-state solution, is the best way to achieve lasting
peace, between Israel and Palestine. It is in this contextthat Jamaica has
recognized the State of Palestine. We call for an immediate ceasefire in
Gaza and the release of hostages to bring an end to the protracted war

and human suffering.

Haiti

Mr President,

Much closerto home, Haiti continues to face one of the most challenging
periods in its storied history. Rampant gangs are causing chronic
instability and unspeakable violence. Millions of Haitians are facing
hunger and dislocation, especially women and children. They need and
deserve the unwavering support of the international community to restore
peace, security and democracy and to address the devastating

humanitarian crisis.

Jamaica will continue to play its part, including through CARICOM and the
Eminent Person’s Group, in supporting the political process in Haiti.

Significant progress has already been made, particularly since the

8
Kingston Talks convened by CARICOM in Jamaica in March of this year.
We welcome the installation of the Transitional Presidential Council, the
appointmentof an interim Prime Minister and Ministerial Cabinet and the
finalization of the Provisional Electoral Council.

The Multinational Security Support Mission is critical to the restoration of
peace and security in Haiti. We reiterate our gratitude to the government
of Kenya for its leadership of and commitment to the MSS. We are pleased
to confirm that on 12 September, Jamaica deployed its initial command
contingent along with Belize, as part of the MSS. We are committed to
scaling up to our committed numbers., but we also call on the international

community to contribute more personnel and equipment.

Restoration of peace and security is critical to the creation of an
environment in which free and fair elections can be held. The
establishment of democratic governance is critical for sustainable

economic growth and development.

Mr President,

Since the deployment of the MSS, we have seen improvements in the
situation in Haiti and have cause for cautious optimism. More is needed,
however, and time is not on Haiti's side. It is critical that we preserve and

advance gains made. It is critical that we maintain hope and stability.

We therefore urge the Security Council to renew the mandate ofthe MSS,
and to consider future transition to a Peace Keeping framework to
guarantee funding. We also call for continued and increased support from
member states, including financial contributions to the Trust Fund. This is
needed for deployment of additional personnel to support the HNP as they

recover communities from criminal gangs.
We further call on the international community to significantly increase
contributions to the Humanitarian Response Plan for Haiti, which remains
underfunded at 39% of the target. Supportto BINUH mustalso be ramped
up, so that displaced families can be fed and provided with critical health

care, and children can return to the classrooms to resume their education.

Jamaica will continue to do what we are able. We will support our sister
CARICOM nation in the effort to restore peace, security and stability in

Haiti and by extension, the region.

Gangs, violence and drugs

Mr. President,

Jamaica is seeking to comprehensively address the issue of gangs, crime
and violence in our own society, fully recognizing the compounding impact
of transnational crime, including illicit trafficking in drugs, arms and

ammunition.

We have embarked upon a mission of transforming and strengthening our
security forces and agencies, while preserving human rights, increasing
operational efficiency, and delivering high-quality policing services to the
public. We have made significant improvement to the working conditions
of our police men and women and the National Police College of Jamaica
has now received the highest international accreditation for curriculum
and quality of training. We continue to expand CCTV networks in
collaboration with our stakeholders, have increased mobility and
introduced new equipment and technology, including forensics. We have

also introduced new community policing models.
The Government is also undertaking social interventions in vulnerable
communities. We have trained and certified approximately 40,000 at-risk
youths and enrolled approximately 81,000 parents in parenting
programmes. We are also working closely with the private sector and

NGOs to expand social services in vulnerable communities.

On transnational organised crime, Jamaica has made substantial
investments in advanced coastal radar systems and acquisition of
offshore patrol vessels. We are also increasing the use of in securing our

ports.

Mr. President,

As a result of these initiatives, major crimes have consistently declined to
the lowestlevels in 25 years. So far this year, there has been a 17 percent
decline in homicides over last year. Jamaicais a safer place to live, work,

raise families and do business.

We recognize that continued bilateral, regional and multilateral
cooperation, especially in the areas of training, intelligence sharing and
joint operations, is vital if we are to comprehensively and sustainably

continue to reduce crime and violence.

In this regard, while we appreciate steps taken, we reiterate our call for
more concrete action from bilateral partners to stem the illicit flow of small
arms and ammunition from their ports. We welcome the recent outcome
of the RevCon 4 on small arms and light weapons. More particularly, we
welcome the emphasis placed on technical assistance and capacity
building, customs control, emerging technologies and through-life

conventional ammunition management. These are all critically relevant

11
matters to ultimately turning around crime ridden inner city communities

into peaceful and prosperous ones.

Cybercrime is a major threat to citizen security and an obstacle to
sustained economic development. International cooperation is necessary
to address the matter of cybercrime. Jamaica actively participated in the
negotiations, together with our fellow CARICOM partners, on the United
Nations Convention on Cybercrime. We therefore look forward to the
adoption of the Convention and look forward to future engagements within

the framework of this instrument.

In closing, Mr. President,

Jamaica has taken difficult decisions and has taken responsibility for our
economic future. We have demonstrated that we are able to positively

impact our own outcomes and redefine our future.

We continue to believe not only in our own resolve but also in the power
of multilateralism and international cooperation to overcome shared global
challenges. The people of the world are counting on these United Nations
and the international community to deliver on climate, on human rights,
on peace and security and on development. With that support, Jamaica is
committed to doing our part to meet the challenges oftoday, while laying

a solid foundation for present and future generations.

| thank you.
