(Provisional Translation)
Address by Prime Minister KISHIDA Fumio
at the Seventy-Ninth Session of the United Nations General Assembly
(Delivered by H.E. Ambassador YAMAZAKI Kazuyuki
on behalf of the Prime Minister)

Mr. President,

Allow me to deliver this statement on behalf of the Prime Minister of
Japan, Mr. KISHIDA Fumio.

1. Introduction:
Mr. President, Excellencies,

The world stands at a historical inflection point. These extreme shifts in
history have become distinctive features of the past three years and will
continue to define the years to come. I have stressed that, at times like these,
we must overcome divisions and confrontations and promote international
cooperation by going back to the basic foundations. In 2022, I have called
for defending “the principles of the UN Charter and the rule of law,” and in
2023, multilateralism with the United Nations at its core, by shedding a light
on “human dignity.”

Russia’s aggression against Ukraine still rages on, and we are witnessing
a dire situation in Palestine and Gaza. Unfortunately, divisions and
confrontations are deepening. In these difficult times, Japan's position
remains unwavering: We should go back to the basic foundations to unite the
international community and deepen solidarity. The “rule of law” and
“human dignity” remain the key to international cooperation.

Today, I would like to highlight the importance of strengthening
governance at both national and international levels as another foundation
for uniting the international community to strengthen the "rule of law" and
protect "human dignity."
At the Summit of the Future, we made a commitment to take action for
the benefit of present and future generations. Building inclusive societies
across the international community, where youth, future generations and
women can thrive, and achieving the SDGs, leaving no one behind, are
overarching goals that resonate with us. We believe the international
community would also agree that the role of governance is critical in
achieving these goals. Such “empathy” among us provides a common ground
for all members of the international community to share and fulfill their
responsibilities.

My message for this year can be summarized in a simple phrase:
"Inclusive governance with shared responsibility".

2. Inclusive governance with shared responsibility

Mr. President,

To address unprecedented crises and challenges, and to protect and
strengthen “the rule of law” and “human dignity,” Japan, as a member of the
international community, is determined to play a role for stronger
governance.

(1) First and foremost, we must strengthen governance to work towards
international peace and security, which is the foundation for a prosperous
society.

Next year marks the 80th anniversary of the United Nations. It is time to
transform the United Nations to address the most pressing challenges in
peace and security and meet the needs of a new era.

Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, which has continued for more than
two and a half years, poses a blatant challenge to the international order
based on the rule of law and shakes its very foundations. There are a host of
issues that need to be addressed, including North Korea’s nuclear and missile
development, the situation in Gaza, and conflict and terrorism in Africa.

2
The international community is in need of a United Nations, in particular,
a Security Council, that is credible and carries out its responsibility
effectively.

At the Summit of the Future, world leaders issued a clear and strong
message on the urgent need to reform the Security Council. In order to
respond in good faith, it is essential to begin the development of a
consolidated reform model and text-based negotiations as soon as possible.
In this regard, it should be underscored that the majority of member states,
including the African Group, are calling for the expansion of both permanent
and non-permanent membership of the Council.

Japan will work with others to achieve a Security Council that is more
representative with developing countries included and effective, reflecting
the realities of the international community.

Japan also attaches great importance to the role of the General Assembly
in the area of international peace and security.

For the sake of future generations, it is necessary to maintain and
strengthen a free and open international order based on the “rule of law” and
to ensure peace, stability and prosperity in the world.

It is with this conviction that I have promoted a Free and Open Indo-
Pacific (FOIP). The vision of FOIP is in line with the goals of the United
Nations. Japan will continue to expand our circle of partners who share this
vision, and together we will address various challenges facing the
international community in a spirit of co-creation.

Strengthening domestic governance is also essential for international
peace, security and prosperity. Japan has continued to spearhead human-
centered international cooperation, based on the concept of human security.

We need to accelerate the efforts of the international community as a
whole towards achieving the SDGs.
It is also vital to address the root causes of conflict by interlinking
humanitarian, development and peace efforts in order to curb the
deterioration of humanitarian situations due to protracted conflicts.

In March this year, during Japan's presidency of the Security Council,
Japan held the open debate on peacebuilding and conflict prevention. We
should strengthen the functions of the Peacebuilding Commission, which has
a unique convening power, and increase its cooperation with the Security
Council to further promote the Humanitarian-Development-Peace Nexus
(HDP Nexus).

In promoting these initiatives, the perspectives of women, youth and
tural areas must be taken into account.

The Women, Peace and Security (WPS) agenda seeks to achieve
sustainable peace through women's participation and leadership in
peacebuilding and disaster recovery processes. When there is governance
that enables women's active participation, the WPS agenda becomes even
more meaningful.

In order to build this type of inclusive society, it is important to nurture
the future generation so that they can take a lead in various initiatives. To
this end, Japan plans to launch a programme to nurture the next generation
of leaders in the field of gender. In order to achieve a flexible and resilient
future society that is rich in diversity and able to respond to new challenges,
Japan will work on promoting youth, supporting research and building
networks for young researchers, and holding a forum for the next generation.

Rural perspective is also important. Japan is trying to utilize the
remarkable technology of companies in rural areas, including active, long-
established companies and start-ups, to promote projects that can contribute
to solving social issues and create a robust virtuous cycle in both the
economies of rural areas and overseas.
Domestic governance is the bedrock of sustainable development, as it
underpins countries! ability to mobilize private investment and domestic
financing. At the same time, each country achieving “sustainable growth”
would amount to the sustainability of the international community as a whole,
a process which would then be supported by international governance. The
focus should therefore be on governance at all levels.

(2) Second, we should all share the responsibilities for responding to new
challenges facing the international community, and work together with a new
approach.

Id like to start by addressing the challenge of nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation--my lifelong work as a politician hailing from Hiroshima.
Secretary-General Guterres puts this challenge as the very first
recommendation in his "New Agenda for Peace," launched last year. Despite
the extended efforts of the international community, the world is now on the
cusp of a reversal in the decreasing trend of the global number of nuclear
arsenals. We must face up to the situation that nuclear weapons are once
again becoming an apparent global risk due to changing geopolitical
circumstances and deepening divisions and confrontations in the
international community.

With these serious concems in mind, I have been steadily taking nuclear
disarmament initiatives under the “Hiroshima Action Plan” to strengthen
realistic and practical efforts to realize a world without nuclear weapons. In
March this year, as the President of the Security Council, Japan chaired the
Ministerial Meeting of the Security Council on “Nuclear Disarmament and
Non-Proliferation.” Following this effort, on the 23rd of this month, I hosted
the High-Level Meeting to launch the Friends of FMCT here in New York.

Next year marks 80 years since the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. As the only country to have ever suffered atomic bombings during
war, Japan will further strengthen efforts to promote accurate understanding
on the realities of nuclear weapons use as the starting point for all nuclear
disarmament measures. Japan will also act to further advance nuclear
disarmament as we head toward the 2026 NPT Review Conference.

5
Japan will also work even more closely with the international community
towards the denuclearization of North Korea, including full implementation
of relevant UN Security Council resolutions. Japan will continue to seek to
normalize its relationship with North Korea, in accordance with the Japan-
DPRK Pyongyang Declaration, through comprehensively resolving
outstanding issues of concern, such as the abductions, nuclear and missile
issues, as well as settlement of the unfortunate past.

The rapid development of emerging technologies is bringing new
challenges to disarmament and non-proliferation efforts. Focusing on the
further development of emerging technologies, Japan intends to actively and
constructively participate in international rule-making on lethal autonomous
weapon systems (LAWS) through balanced discussions, taking into account
humanitarian and security perspectives, so that a common understanding can
be reached among the international community, including stakeholder states.

In discussing new challenges, we must also include aspects of digital
technologies, especially considering that the Global Digital Compact was
just adopted at the Summit of the Future. Digital technologies have the power
to transform the future of the world, thereby making digital cooperation an
essential part of protecting and enhancing human dignity.

Among such digital technologies, there is an urgent need to establish
international governance on artificial intelligence in order to maximize the
opportunities brought by AI while mitigating its risks. Japan has been
working through the Hiroshima AI Process to achieve safe, secure, and
trustworthy AI. We will continue to actively contribute to the discussions on
AI at the United Nations.

In tackling global issues, the evolution of Multilateral Development
Banks has emerged as a new issue. Japan will contribute to further progress
in the MDB evolution in a way that reflects the specificities of each
institution and the discussions of their boards.
Increasing lending capacity to developing countries through utilizing
existing capital and private capital mobilization, and addressing debt
restructuring faced by those countries are also pressing issues. Transparent
and fair development finance, in line with international rules and standards,
is needed now more than ever.

Climate change is a common challenge to all humankind and a critical
issue that the international community collectively needs to address. Japan
has identified climate change as the greatest challenge that needs to be
overcome by bringing about a “New Form of Capitalism.” We are steadily
taking actions and are on track to achieve net zero emissions by 2050.

It is important that all countries come together to achieve the common
goal of net-zero through various pathways that are compatible with economic
growth and energy security.

As an initiative to embody these ideas, Japan has proposed the concept
of the Asia Zero Emission Community (AZEC). We are working with other
Asian countries to simultaneously achieve decarbonization, economic
growth and energy security in the region.

(3) What I would like to highlight this year is the importance of 'inclusive
governance upheld by shared responsibility.’ This requires solidarity among
diverse countries.

At last year's G7 Hiroshima Summit, I set the strengthening of
engagement with partners beyond the G7 as one of the pillars of the Summit.

Since then, Japan has been supporting stronger domestic governance in
developing countries to “protect human dignity” through the exchanging of
opinions with ASEAN, India, Pacific countries as well as with Latin
American countries, including Brazil, which holds the G20 presidency this
year.
Africa is a region that is experiencing dynamic growth, supported by a
young population and the fruits of its efforts to strengthen their inclusive
governance. At the same time, Africa continues to face challenges related to
human dignity, such as poverty, job creation and fragile economic and social
infrastructures, as well as challenges related to peace and stability, such as
conflict, terrorism, and refugees and displaced persons.

Strengthening governance is important as a lever for change to achieve
peace, stability and sustainable development. Investing in human resources
and mobilizing domestic and international resources for this purpose are
essential for economic transformation that leads to growth.

As a long-standing partner of Africa, Japan has been supporting the
strengthening of ecosystems and governance conducive to domestic and
international resource mobilization, including through assistance for fiscal
management and trade facilitation.

Japan has also supported elections to consolidate and strengthen
democracy, and assisted in the capacity-building of administrative and
judicial personnel. Furthermore, we have promoted inter-community
dialogue to foster a shared future, encouraged the participation of citizens,
including youth and women, in the political and reconstruction process, and
supported the strengthening of their livelihoods.

Next year, we will host TICAD 9 in Yokohama. Together with our
African friends and the United Nations, we will find innovative solutions to
Africa's and global challenges.

As a part of these efforts, Japan will consider further preferential
measures in light of the WTO decision so that least developed countries can
achieve smooth and sustainable development after their graduation from the
LDC Category.
3. Conclusion:
Mr. President,

At this year's UN General Assembly, let us all look towards the same
vision for our future and join forces to strengthen governance across the
international community. Let us work together for inclusive societies where
the rule of law and human dignity are upheld.

The United Nations has an important role to play, and the international
community is counting on it to fulfill its mandate. As a member state of the

United Nations, Japan will also contribute to this progress.

Thank you for your attention.
