Fala leet

REPUBLIC OF KENYA

STATEMENT BY
HIS EXCELLENCY WILLIAM S. RUTO PHD., C.G.H,
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA AND
COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF THE
KENYA DEFENCE FORCES
DURING THE
GENERAL DEBATE
OF THE

797 SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

Thursday, 26 September 2024
United Nations, New York

Please check against delivery;

SABLA RRR RT TB A Reema 4
President of the 79' Session of the UN General Assembly, Ambassador
Philemon Yang,

United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Anténio Guterres,

Excellencies Heads of State and Government,

Distinguished Delegates,

Ladies and Gentlemen

1.

Let me begin by congratulating you, Ambassador Yang, on your
election as President of this session of the General Assembly.

. This year’s theme serves as a profound reminder of our shared duty

to promote inclusivity and collaboration as we confront the pressing
challenges of our times.

. These challenges are complex, interconnected, and escalating at an

alarming pace. Conflicts and tensions now pervade every frontier,
undermining the collective security that international cooperation is
meant to uphold. We are witnessing a rise in polarising narratives,
factionalism, social upheavals, wars, and the stockpiling of dangerous
weapons.

. From Gaza to Darfur, Ukraine to Yemen, the Eastern Democratic

Republic of Congo to Sudan, the Sahel region, and Haiti, conflicts are
leaving a devastating trail of destruction. The loss of life and
livelihoods, along with the destruction of property, threatens not
only the futures of individual nations but also the very foundation of
global peace and security. Climate change is increasingly fueling
instability and conflict around the world, intensifying resource
scarcity, displacing communities, and heightening competition over
essential resources like water and land.

2|Page
5. Additionally, rapid advancements are outpacing our ability to
harness technology for good. Cybersecurity breaches and
sophisticated cyberattacks on critical infrastructure increasingly
threaten national security and global stability. The proliferation of
advanced technologies introduces new challenges for arms control
and international regulations. Misinformation and manipulation,
facilitated by social media, further threaten democracies by
undermining public trust and the integrity of democratic processes.

6. These issues require our urgent attention and collective action.
Regrettably, nations are increasingly choosing unilateralism and
militarisation over dialogue and diplomacy. The ‘them versus us’
mentality has produced negative coalitions, escalated tensions, and
eroded trust in the global multilateral system.

7. We cannot sit back and leave the next generation to chance. We must
rise to the occasion, summon the political will, and strengthen our
diplomatic efforts to address security threats through comprehensive,
coordinated, and context-specific solutions. By doing so, we can
restore trust in our multilateral systems and pave the way for lasting
peace, security, and shared prosperity.

Excellencies,

8. Kenya's steadfast commitment to international peace and security
drives our continued investment in promoting stability and harmony
within our region and beyond. Through our participation in the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS), we have stood
shoulder to shoulder with Somalia in their fight against Al Shabaab.
We are proud that Somalia will soon join the Security Council as a
non-permanent member, marking — significant progress in
consolidating national peace and stability. However, it is imperative
that the United Nations continues to support Somalia in forging an
agreement on post-2024 security arrangements.

3|Page
9.

Supporting lasting peace requires long-term commitment. Kenya
therefore welcomes Security Council resolution 2719, establishing a
framework for financing African Union peace support operations
through UN assessed contributions, thereby bolstering our collective
peacekeeping capabilities. Well-funded AU peace operations are not
just an African priority but a global necessity, given the complexity
and interconnected nature of international peace and security.

10.We must use all available tools to pursue peace. At the request of

11.

South Sudan's leadership, | launched the all-inclusive “Tumaini
Initiative’ earlier this year, uniting warring parties and _ political
leaders to address the root causes of the prolonged conflict. |
commend their commitment to peace and thank regional and
international partners for their political and financial support.

At the last General Assembly, | announced Kenya's readiness to lead
a Multinational Security Support Mission (MSS) to Haiti, at the
Haitian government's request. Following the Security Council's
authorisation under resolution 2699, Kenya has deployed 382
specially trained police officers. Just a few days ago, | had the
opportunity to visit Haiti, witness the work of our officers in the field,
and observe their remarkable progress. Our support for the Haitian
National Police has significantly advanced the pacification of cities
and towns, protected critical infrastructure, and relieved many
communities previously held captive by criminal gangs. | also
commend Haiti's political leadership for forging an agreement and a
promising roadmap towards free, fair, and democratic elections.

12.We are deeply grateful for the financial and logistical support from

member states led by the U.S. and Canada, and other member states
that are shouldering the burden. This has been critical to the MSS
deployment thus far. However, Kenya and other Caribbean and
African countries are ready to deploy but are hindered by insufficient
equipment and funding. | appeal to all member states to stand in
solidarity with the people of Haiti by providing necessary support,
either directly to MSS-contributing countries or through the UN Trust

4|Page
Fund. | must emphasise however, that Kenya will deploy the
additional contingent towards attaining the target of all the 2500
police officers by January next year. The progress so far made in Haiti
demonstrates that what was once deemed mission impossible is
indeed a present and undeniable reality.

Mr. President,

13.We must candidly acknowledge that international cooperation, in its
current form, has clear limitations. It is constrained by entrenched
systems and structures that prevent effective action and meaningful
progress. Since the last General Assembly, the global situation has
deteriorated across multiple fronts; conflicts have deepened,
economic disparities have widened, and the climate crisis has
intensified. To address these challenges, we must rethink and reform
global collaboration mechanisms, making them more responsive,
adaptable, and impactful.

14.The existing international security architecture, represented by the
UN Security Council, continues to hamper efforts to maintain
international peace and security. The Council is dysfunctional,
undemocratic, non-inclusive, unaccountable, autocratic, and opaque.
An institution that excludes 54 African countries, representing 1.4
billion people, while allowing one nation to veto decisions of the
remaining 193 member states, is unacceptable. We must urgently seek
to make the Security Council truly representative, inclusive,
transparent, effective, and accountable.

15.We in Africa are not advocating for reform and collective action
solely at the UN. In fact, we are also in the process of
comprehensively reforming the AU to become a fit-for-purpose
institution that can effectively represent African nations globally and
deliver prosperity.

5|Page
Excellencies,

16.Peace and development are inseparable pillars; one cannot flourish
without the other. Yet, the 2024 Sustainable Development Goals
Report paints a bleak picture. Only 17% of targets are on track;
nearly half show minimal or moderate progress, and over one-third
have stalled or regressed. The Covid-19 pandemic, escalating
conflicts, geopolitical tensions, and climate change have severely
impacted progress towards the $DGs and Paris Agreement goals.

17.Inadequate and unsustainable means of implementation, particularly
in financing, technical support, and capacity building, continue to
obstruct our efforts to realise the 2030 Agenda. Biased
methodologies employed by credit rating agencies further
disadvantage African countries, making it more difficult to access
affordable financing from international capital markets. Additionally,
unilateral economic, financial, and trade measures not only impede
the full achievement of economic and social development, but also
undermine the principles of international cooperation, mutual
respect, and sovereignty.

18.Let us pause and reflect on the true significance of this predicament.
Many countries in the Global South are forced to choose between
buying medicine and hospital equipment or paying debt, and
between buying text books or paying debt, and between hiring
teachers or paying debt, and | can go on and on. This is not an
abstract illustration detached from daily reality, but the normal
experience of billions of ordinary people. One must wonder, what
goes on in the minds of those who prioritise economic returns, over
people. What happened to humanity?

19.Addressing these deep-rooted challenges requires transformative
changes to build a more equitable and resilient global framework.
We have outlined many of these solutions in the Pact for the Future,
demonstrating our clear understanding of what needs to be done.
However, we have yet to muster the political will necessary to turn
these commitments into action.

6|Page
Excellencies,

20. It is a fundamental principle of development that no nation
can achieve lasting prosperity if its neighbors remain impoverished.
Our economies are interconnected, and the well-being of one
directly impacts the others. We must ensure that developing countries
have the necessary foundations to claim their rightful place in the
21st-century global economy. This is not just a moral and fairness
imperative; it is a strategic necessity to address systemic challenges
such as migration, labor market disparities, climate change, and
global security.

21.Strengthening these foundations requires reforming the international
financial architecture. Facilitating debt relief, concessional financing,
grants, and de-risking lending instruments is essential to increasing
investment to develop vital infrastructure and expand critical sectors.
Consider Africa's immense untapped potential in clean energy
resources. Harnessing this potential is crucial not only for the
continent’s economic growth and social resilience, but also for global
priorities like accelerating the energy transition, combating climate
change, and diversifying supply chains.

22. Energy-hungry industries, such as data centres, mineral
processing and manufacturing, are seeking clean and affordable
sources, which Africa can provide in abundance. Yet, out of the 500
GW of renewable energy added to the global mix in 2023, Africa
accounted for less than 3 GW. How is this possible, given the
continent’s vast natural resources, skilled workforce, and massive
energy needs? We cannot allow Africa to be left behind once again.
Affordable financing is essential, but so are transformative policies
that include fair trade practices, market access, inclusive international
tax cooperation, technology transfer, and capacity building.

7|Page
23. This is why at COP 28, we launched the Africa Green
Industrialisation Initiative, aimed at unlocking investments for the
continent's immense opportunities. This pan-African initiative
promotes large-scale, high-impact, and bankable green industrial and
infrastructure projects. Next month, we will host an investment
forum for the Accelerated Partnerships for Renewals in Africa to
attract investments for the untapped potential in solar, wind,
geothermal, and hydropower.

24. Globally, we also need to improve the tools we already have.
The SDG Stimulus Fund, initiated by the Secretary-General in 2023,
requires our joint support to succeed, including from multilateral
development banks. Similarly, replenishing the International
Development Association (IDA) is essential to provide concessional
loans to the world’s poorest countries. Earlier this year, | hosted the
IDA 21 replenishment summit in Nairobi, where African leadership
reaffirmed the critical importance of IDA for developing countries
and called for an ambitious replenishment of $120 billion. Our
collective efforts must include trust and accountability to ensure that
we fulfill all our promises and commitments.

25. Additionally, we launched the Africa Club, an alliance of
African multilateral financial institutions to strengthen and support
Africa’s position in the global financial architecture. This body will
serve as a powerful negotiator on behalf of the continent, coordinate
with global financial institutions, and leverage African countries’
balance sheets to increase investment and create jobs.

26. We believe that African institutions, such as the Afrexim Bank,
Trade and Development Bank, and Africa Finance Corporation
among others, understand the continent even better. As part of the
reform of the international financial architecture, we must not only
reform the multilateral institutions, but also support and stop bias
against these African institutions.

8|Page
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

27. Climate change remains one of the greatest challenges of our
time. Biodiversity loss and pollution have created environmental
crises that upend lives, reverse progress in poverty reduction, and
strain ecosystems to their breaking point. Extreme weather
conditions continue to hinder the development aspirations of many
countries, especially in Africa, where severe climate-related hazards
are becoming more frequent and intense.

28. In 2022, over 110 million people in Africa were directly
affected by climate related disasters, resulting in more than $8.5
billion in economic damages. According to the Emergency Event
Database, there were approximately 5,000 fatalities, though the true
toll is likely higher due to under-reporting.

29. We are at a crossroads, and the path to correcting the climate
course is clear. COP29, to be held this November in Baku,
Azerbaijan, presents a critical milestone in ensuring that the solutions
we implement are rooted in fairness and opportunity for all.
However, the new climate finance goal expected at COP29 faces
significant hurdles, as deep disagreements persist over who should
contribute and how much funding is needed. Without swift
resolution, these divisions risk derailing our collective progress on
climate action, just as the global situation becomes increasingly
urgent.

30. Let me be clear: political posturing and inaction will neither
protect the vulnerable from the consequences of a runaway climate
crisis nor save our civilization from ecosystem collapse. It is therefore
critical that all nations step forward to meet this moment with
ambition and responsibility.

31.As we confront the escalating impacts of climate change, we must
also recognise the interconnected environmental challenges we face,
such as plastic pollution, which continues to wreak havoc on
ecosystems and threatens global sustainability.

9|Page
32. It is imperative that we adopt a robust global plastics treaty
during the fifth round of negotiations in Busan, in the Republic of
Korea this November. Kenya fully supports an ambitious outcome
and the African proposal to establish the treaty secretariat in Nairobi,
thereby reinforcing UNEP’s role.

33. It is indeed unfortunate and regrettable that UNEP is the only
body where serecratriats of conventions created under it are
increasingly being carved away and located elsewhere. UNEP being
one of only two UN headquarters in the global south must not be
cannibalised for whatever purpose or reason.

Mr. President,

34. As the host country for UNEP and UN-Habitat, | take this
opportunity to thank the Assembly for approving the upgrade of the
infrastructure at the United Nations Office in Nairobi (UNON), the
largest UN campus in the world. This project includes the
construction of new office spaces and the design of ultra-modern
conference facilities. These developments mark a_ significant
milestone towards enhancing the quality and accessibility of the
Secretariat’s services to Member States. Not only will they serve
current needs, but they will also strengthen the future success of
multilateralism. We look forward to the Assembly’s continued
support as construction begins in 2025. It will be critical to ensure
that UNON receives sustainable and predictable resources to ensure
the timely completion of this upgrade.

35. Kenya will continue to play its part in ensuring that UNON
fulfills its mandate. Accordingly, the government of Kenya _ has
undertaken extensive improvements and expansion of physical
infrastructure around the complex and will continue working
towards making Nairobi a regional and humanitarian hub for the
United Nations.

10|Page
Mr. President, Excellencies,

36. As we reflect on the theme of this session, the call for unity in
diversity in the pursuit of peace, development, and human dignity,
it is evident that we must re-imagine international cooperation to
align with the complex realities of the 21st century. Our actions must
reflect our ambition and commitment to a world where progress is
measured not just by economic growth but by the well-being, rights,
and dignity of every person. The challenges we face: from climate
crises to economic inequality, demand a bold rethinking of how we
work together, grounded in mutual respect and shared responsibility.

37. The achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals cannot
be reserved for a privileged few; it must be a shared success that
uplifts all nations, transcending borders and disparities. Our collective
efforts to combat climate change must be rooted in fairness and
equity, ensuring that no nation or community bears a
disproportionate burden.

38. This is our shared journey, and we have a say in the choices we
make. We must move beyond outdated paradigms of power and
influence to create a system of international cooperation that reflects
the aspirations and dignity of every human being. We must embrace
a new vision of global solidarity, one that upholds the principles of
equity and inclusivity. It is within our power to build a world that
embodies the true spirit of the United Nations: a world where every
voice is heard, every life is valued, and global progress is shared by
all. This is the cooperation our peoples expect, our future demands,
and it is the commitment we must deliver.

| thank you.

11|Page
