Statement by H.E. Mr. Sadyr Zhaparov, the President of the
Kyrgyz Republic, at the General Debate of the 79" session of
the United Nations General Assembly

(24 September, 2024, New York, USA)

Mr. Secretary-General,

Mr. President,

Distinguished heads of delegations,
Ladies and gentlemen,

| congratulate the countries of Africa and the distinguished Mr.
Philemon Yang on his election as President of the 79th session of
the UN General Assembly. Let me wish you success in this
responsible position and assure you that Kyrgyzstan will provide
full support to your presidency in the interests of peace and
sustainable development. | also express my gratitude to the
distinguished Mr. Dennis Francis for his active work as President
of the 78th session.

On behalf of the Kyrgyz Republic, | reaffirm our commitment
to international law, the principles and provisions of the UN Charter
and express our full support for the Organization’s efforts to
maintain international security, address global social, economic
and climate challenges, and protect human rights and freedoms.

Modern global challenges, such as the climate crisis, threats
to food security and growing inequality, require the united efforts of
the international community.

In this turbulent period, | call on all states to continue to
support the United Nations in its core mission - to maintain peace
and prevent modern risks and threats.

Now, more than ever, such support is extremely important.

| hope that under the leadership of Secretary-General Mr.
Antonio Guterres and with the active support of Member States,
our Organization will be able to effectively fulfill its functions and
help countries address pressing global issues.

Ladies and gentlemen,
We live in a world that is becoming more unpredictable and
complicated every year.

We are facing unprecedented challenges — a global climate
catastrophe, economic inequality dividing peoples and continents,
and, of course, conflicts that destroy hope for a peaceful future. In
this context, we observe a troubling paradox: global military
spending is growing, while least developed and vulnerable
states continue to suffer from a lack of resources for their
development and survival.

| would like to draw your attention to two conflicting realities of
our time.

The first reality is unprecedented spending on military
needs.

According to the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute, global military spending in 2023 increased by 6.8% and
reached a record level of US$2.5 trillion per year, or 2.3% of global
GDP, the highest amount in decades.

Leading powers are spending huge amounts of money on
creating and developing armed forces, increasing arsenals and
developing new, more destructive types of weapons.

Unfortunately, this is happening in a world where many
nations and peoples still do not have access to basic services —
water, medical care, education.

We must ensure that the money that allocates to wars,
destruction, death, could go to creation or to solving global
challenges for all of humanity, to help countries in their fight
against climate change, to prevent mass displacement and
global migration.

Military spending and armed conflicts have a devastating
effect on many countries, exacerbating poverty and inequality.

Conflicts and armed clashes lead to the destruction of
infrastructure, a drop in living standards and mass migration,
creating a vicious circle of poverty and instability. While some
countries increase their budgets for weapons, many of those who
need help lose the chance for a normal life.

The second reality is the lack of progress in supporting
poor and vulnerable countries.

We all know that economic inequality continues to rise.
World leaders have been talking for decades about the need
to eliminate poverty, but there is always a lack of willpower.

Countries in Africa, South Asia and Latin America continue to
face chronic underfunding, a lack of support from the international
community, and systemic economic crises that cannot be solved
by individual countries.

Countries at the very bottom of the economic pyramid need
investment in healthcare, education, infrastructure and climate
change mitigation.

However, with the rapid growth of military spending,
assistance to these countries is becoming increasingly insufficient.
Humanitarian and development assistance programs are often
underfunded, while resources that could be directed toward social
needs are spent on purchasing weapons and conducting military
operations.

Inequality between states is not only persisting but
intensifying.

The world faces an important choice.

We can continue increasing arms, seeking security through
military power, or we can choose the path of sustainable
development aimed at eradicating poverty and supporting the most
vulnerable.

Resources that are directed to military needs could make a
huge contribution to addressing global challenges - whether it is
access to clean water, education for children in developing
countries, fighting famine, or financing climate change programs.

To make progress in this direction, coordinated efforts are
needed from both: rich and least developed countries.

Eirst, developed countries should not only increase the

financial assistance to least developed countries, but also make it
targeted, focusing on_ infrastructure projects and_ social

development.
Second, least developed countries should actively be involved

in international initiatives on sustainable development and commit
to the efficient use of the provided resources.

Third, the transfer of modern technologies from rich countries
to poor ones is crucial, enabling the latter to develop their
economies independently and reduce dependence on external
assistance.
Today, we observe that geopolitical conflicts not only require
increased defense spending, but, more importantly, international
cooperation for their resolution.

If the global community can unite efforts to achieve an
equitable resource distribution, help vulnerable states, and
eliminate the causes of armed conflict, we can create a safer and
more prosperous world for all.

If we begin investing not in war but in people, if instead of
weapons we invest in education, healthcare, and sustainable
development, we can build a prosperous world.

It is time to reconsider global security priorities.

Security is not only about having strong armies and weapons
of mass destruction. True security will only achieve with trust,
equality and prosperity for all peoples.

By investing in the future of least developed countries, helping
them end poverty, providing opportunities for sustainable growth,
we can create a more stable and secure world.

In this context, | believe it is crucial and fair for the world
community to pay greater attention to the issues of sustainable
development of the Global South and to defend the interests of the
"least developed countries, developing countries", "landlocked
developing countries" and "small island developing states".

Dear colleagues,

One of the most dangerous challenges threatening the very
existence of our planet is climate change, which is getting worse
every day and affects almost all countries and peoples worldwide.

The accelerated melting of glaciers, the increasing frequency
of natural disasters and the reduction of water resources in
mountain ecosystems are deeply concerning. These negative
consequences threaten the lives of local communities, contribute
to rising poverty levels, deterioration of infrastructure and inflict
serious damage on national economies.

Kyrgyzstan faces a triple challenge - the need to invest in
development, reduce poverty and adapt to climate change to
achieve carbon neutrality.

Each of these areas requires special financing, especially in
the context of ensuring climate resilience for our country and
vulnerable communities.
We are determined to succeed by working together with our
partners.

Kyrgyzstan proposes to strengthen and globally expand the
debt-for-nature mechanism, thus helping developing and least
developed countries jointly combat climate change.

Kyrgyzstan supports the UN Secretary-General’s position on
the need to reform the international financial architecture and
reduce the debt burden for developing countries.

We also propose a mechanism of swapping the external debt
to climate and sustainable development projects, and we are
working on creating a Climate Trust Fund that will finance
environmental projects in mountainous regions.

The Kyrgyz Republic pays special attention to climate issues
in the implementation of its national policy and, based on the
principles of green development, sets an ambitious goal of
achieving carbon neutrality by 2050.

More than 95% of our energy is produced mainly by
hydropower plants, which are the main driver towards achieving
the goal of zero emissions.

Our country has vast opportunities to integrate renewable
energy sources into various sectors of the economy, developing
electric transport infrastructure, sustainable agriculture and
ecotourism.

We are taking active measures to stimulate the use of electric
vehicles and improve the energy efficiency of constructions.

| would like to give just one example of our desire to build a
"green" future.

We know that "smart city" projects aimed at sustainable
development such as Neom in Saud Arabia, Masdar City in UAE,
Western Harbor in Sweden, and Sunny Valley in China have been
implemented and continue to develop successfully. The dreams of
the peoples of these countries have become a reality and an
example for us too.

In June 2023, on the shores of our pearl - Lake Issyk-Kul we
began construction of a modern and innovative city "Asman", which
means "Sky" in Kyrgyz language.

Next year, we will begin construction of another “green city” in
the city of Kemin.

We strive to build a "green" city that will serve as an example
for other regions of our country and will help preserve clean nature
for future generations, and which, | am confident, will become an
economic, trade, cultural and tourist hub, as well as a center for
innovation and new technologies.

Central Asia is becoming an important region in terms of
global security and the world economy.

Kyrgyzstan, together with neighboring states, continues to
work on the sustainable development of the region. Together with
Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, we are building the Kambar-Ata-1
hydropower plant, which will meet the region's needs for energy
and water.

We are also involved in the construction of the China-
Kyrgyzstan-Uzbekistan railway, which will enhance trade and
transport cooperation and connect the East and West of the
continent.

Ladies and gentlemen,

The future of our world depends on the path we choose. We
should not increase military spending, leading to further escalation
of conflicts and disasters. Instead, we must direct our efforts toward
building a just, safe, and prosperous world for all.

Our choice today will determine what tomorrow will be like for
future generations.

We need relief of international tensions.

The Kyrgyz Republic is ready to contribute to the efforts of the
UN General Assembly and the Security Council aimed at
establishing a stable world order and achieving Sustainable
Development Goals and, making a meaningful contribution to the
collective efforts of the international community in addressing
global challenges and threats.

In this regard, we put forward our candidacy for a non-
permanent member of the UN Security Council for 2027-2028.

As acountry that has never been elected to this key UN body,
we count on your support in the elections to be held in June 2026
in New York.

If elected, Kyrgyzstan will continue to advocate for the
improvement of the efficiency and transparency in the Council's
work, as well as for expanding its membership, taking into account
balanced regional representation.
It is time to address the lack of representation of African
countries in the Council and correct the historical injustice that 60
UN member states, including Kyrgyzstan, have never been elected
to the Security Council, while certain states have been elected
multiple times.

At the Future Summit, UN Member States reaffirmed the
importance of the Sustainable Development Goals and the need
for their full implementation. Kyrgyzstan remains committed to the
global 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and our
achievements confirm our firm intention to achieve the Goals,
taking into account national priorities and financial capabilities.

The UN Sustainable Development Goals are integrated into
the National Development Strategy of Kyrgyzstan until 2040, which
creates opportunities for sustainable economic and _ social
development, digitalization, entrepreneurship, as well as the
introduction of innovative and environmentally _ friendly
technologies for current and future generations.

On July 22 of this year, we adopted the Law on the Protection
of the Rights and Funds of Private Entrepreneurs and Foreign
Investors.

This Law on the Protection of Investor Business provides for
penalties for government officials involved in the following
violations:

- illegal and unjustified refusal to register with the state;

- illegal and unjustified refusal to issue licenses;

- unjustified and illegal restrictions on activities;

- unjustified and illegal interference in the activities of
investors and private entrepreneurs.

For the above violations of the Law, the most severe
punishments are provided.

They provide for imprisonment from two to five years and
confiscation of property, or large monetary fines are provided.

Next year, our country will present the National Voluntary
Review on the implementation of the SDGs.

We are ready to share our experience, discuss the progress
we have made, and continue moving toward our goal of becoming
one of the top 30 countries in the world in SDG implementation by
2030.

As amountainous country, Kyrgyzstan has consistently drawn
global attention to the challenges of sustainable development in
mountain regions since the early 2000s. With our initiative and the
broad support of mountain countries, the “Five-Year Action Plan for
the Development of Mountain Regions” is being implemented from
2023 to 2027.

| call on all states to participate actively in this project.

| invite you to take partin the Second Global Mountain Summit
“Bishkek+25” in 2027, where the results of the “Mountain Five-Year
Plan” will be reviewed. Furthermore, we are promoting the initiative
to include a permanent global dialogue on “Mountains and Climate”
in the annual program of the UN Climate Change Conference.

Kyrgyzstan is actively working to preserve the snow leopard,
which has become a symbolof long-term sustainable development
in our region. In December 2023, the snow leopard was recognized
as a national symbol of Kyrgyzstan. Together with 11 countries, we
are working on protecting this unique animal. In this regard, | am
honored to announce the submission of a UN General Assembly
resolution to proclaim an “International Snow Leopard Day” and
ask everyone to support this initiative.

The inhabitants of mountainous regions face daily challenges
such as water shortages, food insecurity, poverty, and limited
access to basic services.

These countries should not be left alone to face these
problems. We call on the international community to take active
steps to address these issues.

Dear colleagues,
Ladies and gentlemen,

In conclusion, | would like to quote from the epic "Manas"
which calls for friendship, unity and solidarity: "Bup *xakKagaH Oa,
Oup *eHMeH KON Ubirapbin, Ky4-KyOaTTbI GupuKTupennu'" (‘Let
us unite our forces, acting as one’); "Bupumank GOap x*epze -
TuUpunuk Gap." (‘When there is unity, there is prosperity’).

The modern multilateral system, designed for a simpler and
more stable world, is not suited to solving the complex,
interconnected, and rapidly changing challenges of today.

Only through cooperation can we build a strong and bright
future.
Thank you for your attention.
