ra
a

Statement of the Republic of Kiribati to the United Nations at its 79t" Session to
be delivered on September 26, 2024 at GA Hall in the Headquarters of the United
Nations in New York.

President of the General Assembly,

Head of States and Governments

Secretary General of the United Nations H.E. Mr. Antonio Guterres,
Excellencies,

Ladies and Gentlemen.

| am happy to greet you on behalf of the Government and people of the
Republic of Kiribati,

Kam na bane ni mauri!

At the outset, | wish to join other delegations in congratulating your
Excellency and the Government and people of Cameroon on your election
as the President of this 79" Session of the United Nations General Assembly
and to assure you of Kiribati’s full support and cooperation as you steer our
work over the next 12 months. We also acknowledge the effort and work of
the outgoing President of the 78" Session, His Excellency Dennis Francis of
Trinidad and Tobago, for his leadership for the past year.

1|Page
It is with immense pride and a deep sense of responsibility that Kiribati
stands before this Assembly, marking 25 years of our membership in the
United Nations. A quarter - century ago, Kiribati joined this esteemed body
with a simple yet profound belief — that the challenges we face as a Small
Island Nation are inextricably linked to the fate of the global community. As
we celebrate this milestone, we honor the path we have walked with our
global partners and we reaffirm our commitment to the core principles of the
United Nations, peace, justice, human rights, responsibility and respect and
sustainable development.

The theme, “Leaving no one behind and acting together for the
advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity
for present and future generations” cannot be more relevant as global
conflicts escalates, causing widespread destruction, displacing people and
leaving millions neglected and marginalized.

The theme reminds us that, despite the ongoing crises, we must stand
firmly together as responsible leaders of the 193 member nations of this
greatest multinational organization and commit ourselves to do together
whatever is necessary to get the world back on the path of peace, progress
and prosperity. Kiribati aligns itself with this noble vision, recognizing the
urgent need for collective action that ensures no nation, especially the most
vulnerable, is left behind.

2|Page
What we witness in the world today and for the past 79 years, suggests that
the founding fathers’ aspiration for lasting peace is far from being realized.
The theme is therefore a timely reminder not to lose hope over the heart-
breaking scenes before us but to re-energize our unity, solidarity and
collective determination to overcome the forces that stand against the

multilateralism that our UN family embodies.

Kiribati reaffirms the critical importance of reinvigorating multilateralism. The
United Nations must remain the central platform for collective global action,
as no single nation can address the complexities of today’s challenges on its
own - be it pandemics, terrorism, conflict, human trafficking, and climate

change to name a few.

It cannot be disputed that the UN that was designed in 1945 by the 51
founding members to restore and maintain world peace and security out of
the ash and devastation of World War II, has now become the largest
international organization on earth that deals with all aspects of human
livelihood and wellbeing to such an extent that its core function of maintaining
world peace and improving living standards has been greatly thwarted. This
is further exacerbated by the lack of unity and solidarity among member
states, coupled with the persistent lack of respect for the UN Charter and for
the rights and sovereignty of nations under the Charter. The apparent lack
of unity and solidarity within the membership of this family is very much
evident in the inability of members to stand united on issues of common
concern, the increasing polarization of global issues and in the proliferation
of exclusive groupings which tends to breed more disunity and distrust

among members.

3|Page
Mr. President

The success or failure of the United Nations in its core mission to achieve
peace, progress and prosperity depends not only on the dedication,
commitment and persistence of its leadership and membership but also on
the quality of the teamwork between the two. The theme is a reminder of the
need to gauge the performance of the United Nations against its core mission
of maintaining world peace, improving living standards and the promotion of
human rights and freedoms. In this vein, our collective deliberations at this
79" Session must shape a more effective path for the United Nations,
ensuring it meets the pressing challenges of our time and serves all nations
equitably. Considering the significant disparity between the United Nations
intended mission and its actual outcomes, an in-depth analysis is needed to
explore why the organization has been unsuccessful in preventing and
resolving conflicts. It is important that the root causes of these failures are
identified and addressed. Equally important is the need to stress the crucial
role of the UN Secretary General jointly with the P5 members of the Security
Council in putting a stop to ongoing conflicts and in preventing new ones
from occurring.

UN Security Council Reform

In order to make the United Nations fit to deal effectively with new and
complex challenges confronting humanity at this time, Kiribati calls for long-
overdue reforms of the United Nations Security Council to ensure that it
reflects the realities of today’s world. We believe that the permanent
membership of the Council should be expanded to be more inclusive and
representative, including allowing seats for Small Island Developing States

4|Page
(SIDS) and other vulnerable countries. To Ensure that the perspectives and

needs of the most vulnerable nations are heard and addressed.

Mr. President

My country firmly believes that members’ respect for the UN Charter and for
each other’s rights and sovereignty is key to the peace of the world and to
the efficient and effective functioning of the United Nations’ multilateralism.
It is therefore of paramount importance that each one of us re-commit
ourselves to fully respect the Charter and each other’s rights and
sovereignty. Of equal importance is a renewal of our commitment to trust
each other as members of this great United Nations family.

Peacekeeping and International Security

Peacekeeping remains a cornerstone of international cooperation for
maintaining global security and stability. Kiribati is proud to have contributed
to this effort by deploying police personnel to support the United Nations
Peacekeeping Mission in South Sudan. This marks the second time that
Kiribati has sent its Police Officers to assist in peacekeeping operations in
Sudan, underscoring our deep commitment to international peace and
security. Kiribati remains steadfast in its belief that global peace can only be
achieved through collective action and we will continue to play our part in

supporting United Nations peacekeeping missions.

5|Page
Kiribati firmly believes that a country without peace, as is the case for
countries currently devastated by wars and conflicts, cannot undertake any
meaningful development while its people are deprived of enjoying a normal
way of life and forced to live in refugee camps or as homeless people
surviving through charity and humanitarian donations. People living in such
dire conditions have no way of becoming economically productive in order to
feel a sense of human pride and dignity and cannot voluntarily free
themselves out of such predicament until the conflict has been resolved,
peace restored, and life is back to normal. It is therefore crucial that the UN’s
core mission of maintaining international peace and security must be
achieved first before member countries can meaningfully undertake any
development and before their people can participate meaningfully in such
developments and thereby gain a sense of self-respect and self- dignity in
being able to make ends meet on their own independent efforts. In other
words, Development and Human Dignity are not achievable without
Peace.

Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons

Kiribati’s unwavering commitment to global peace is deeply rooted in its
tragic history with nuclear weapons. As a nation that has witnessed firsthand
the destructive and long-lasting consequences of nuclear testing, Kiribati
remain steadfast in our support for the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons (TPNW), a landmark agreement that represents a collective effort
to eliminate the threat of nuclear weapons from our world. Kiribati firmly
believes that the only path to global security is through complete nuclear
disarmament and we stand in solidarity with other states in advocating for a

world free of nuclear weapons.

6|Page
Kiribati recently launched its first ever Foreign Policy during its 45" National
Day celebration on 12" July this year. This landmark document principally
seeks to enhance the policy objectives of the core pillars of the Kiribati Vision
for 20 Years. It captures the ways forward on how we seek to engage
effectively and strategically with our partners in areas of shared and mutual
interests to transform and protect our people and nation. Our Foreign Policy
also reaffirms our right to self-determination, a right to which we shall
continue to exercise, in pursuance of a prosperous, healthy, and peaceful
future, in full exercise of permanent sovereignty over our territory and the
natural resources within. It also reasserts and re-establishes Kiribati’s
identity as a “large ocean State” in recognition of our large ocean territory,

ocean geography, and ocean resources.

Mr. President allow me at this juncture to highlight Kiribati’s views and
perspectives on some pertinent issues for small islands such as climate
change and sea level rise, the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), marine conservation and protection and the Pact of the future-and
on the crucial link between Peace, Sustainable Development, Human
Dignity and the concept of Leaving No one Behind as highlighted in the

theme.

7T|Page
Kiribati’s designation as a Least Developed Country (LDC) reflects not only
our economic challenges but also our acute vulnerability to climate change.
Kiribati geographical isolation from world major markets coupled with the
volatility of global commodity prices and the increasing frequency of extreme
weather events, exacerbates our development challenges. The high cost of
imports, limited export opportunities and reliance on fluctuating external
markets further strain our efforts to achieve sustainable growth and
development. While we are committed to the long-term goal of graduating
from the LDC category, we recognize that the path to graduation must take
into account the unprecedented challenges we face, particularly in areas of
climate change, economic resilience, and social development. Kiribati
welcomes the endorsement of our LDC status by the United Nations
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) given the continued vulnerabilities
we face. Our graduation status from the LDC category which had been
deferred to a later date remains at the back of our minds and what it would
mean for us in the future given these unprecedented challenges. It is for this
reason among others that we recognize the Multidimensional Vulnerability
Index (MVI) potential as a more fitting measure of vulnerability for all
developing countries. For Kiribati and other Small Island Developing States
(SIDs) the Multidimensional Vulnerability Index (MVI) represents a crucial
step forward in recognizing the unique vulnerabilities we face. Climate
change, rising sea levels, and economic fragility pose threats to our people.
We call on the international community to accelerate efforts toward the
operationalization of the MVI. This will enable more accurate assessments
of vulnerability and unlock targeted support that Kiribati and other vulnerable
nations urgently need. Kiribati remains focused on ensuring that when we
do graduate, it will be a sustainable and resilient transition that secures a

prosperous future for our people.

8|Page
Climate Change

We believe that humanity must be fully informed that the riches and
resources of the planet are finite and must not be overexploited to the extent
that the planet’s health and wealth is compromised as is now evident in the
in the climate crisis caused by the overexploitation of the planet resources
during the past century of industrialization.

While international dialogue on climate change has been extensive, Kiribati
urges that we move beyond words to concrete actions. The commitments
made in international forums including the COP meetings must translate into
tangible results on the ground. As we continue to advocate for mitigation, it
is clear that adaptation and resilience building are critical for low lying atoll
nations like Kiribati. Coastal protection remains a priority for Kiribati and while
adaptative measures such as plantation of mangroves and demarcating of
seagrass continues, there is a dire need for interventions in hard

infrastructure such as resilient seawall.

9|Page
Climate change is undeniably the driving force behind sea level rise. Kiribati
continues to grapple with the challenges posed by sea level rise, which
endangers our land, agriculture and our way of life. The AOSIS declaration
on sea level rise and statehood encourages our dedication to building
resilience against climate impacts and emphasizes the urgent need for
global action. The United Nations recognition of the profound impacts of
climate change and sea level rise, through the establishment of a high-level
platform to address sea level rise during this 79" session of the UNGA, is a
notable and welcome step. It reflects the urgency of addressing climate
change and its devastating consequences on vulnerable communities
worldwide. In line with our commitment to the 2050 Blue Pacific Strategy, we
strongly advocate for global climate action including maintaining the 1.5-
degree Celsius goal and addressing sea level rise as essential to
safeguarding the livelihoods, identity, sovereignty and security of Pacific
Island Communities especially low-lying atolls, which are only 2 to 3 meters

above sea level.

10|Page
Mr. President

Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda

As we continue our journey towards achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals by 2030, Kiribati has localized the SDGs in a 20-year development
road map or vision called the KV20 with its primary aim to make Kiribati a
healthy, wealthy and most peaceful nation by 2036. This localization effort
ensures that the SDGs are not merely theoretical goals but are embedded in
our national policies projects and initiatives. Sustainable development is
crucial for the long-term resilience and prosperity of Kiribati and other Small
Island Developing states. However, the realization of these goals requires
enhanced capacity development, technology transfer, and stronger data
support systems to better meet the unique and special circumstances of
vulnerable countries. We also emphasize the urgent need for reforming
global financial institutions to align with the development needs and to
ensuring that financing mechanisms are more accessible, flexible and
responsive to the development priorities of Small developing states, allowing
us to pursue sustainable growth and safeguard our future.

Kiribati also commits and looks forward to the implementation of the Antigua
and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS (ABAS). Focusing on several key areas
aimed at promoting sustainable development, resilience, and addressing the
unique challenges faced by Small Island Developing States such as climate
change resilience, sustainable economic development, access to financing,
biodiversity conversation to name a few. ABAS reflects the need for tailored
solutions that recognize the unique circumstances of SIDS while promoting
sustainable development and resilience against external shocks.

11|Page
Marine conservation and protection

Fisheries continue to hold prominence as a priority sector within our Kiribati
Vision for 20 Years Plan (KV20), given that ocean resources significantly

contribute to Kiribati's economy.

Kiribati’s huge reliance on the tuna fishing license revenue which finances
about 70% of the Government’s annual expenditure budget, makes it
mandatory for the Government to take special care of the health of the
marine environment as evidenced in its adoption of the marine spatial
planning of its entire 3.5million square km of its tuna rich ocean. In order to
promote public awareness and participation in marine protection and
conservation, a number of programmes have been launched in some
villages and communities in which people are encouraged to make village-
based rules for protecting fisheries in their areas against over exploitation
and sanctioning offenders in accordance with well accepted cultural

practices.

12|Page
However, with our limited capacity in monitoring and surveilling of our large
Economic Exclusive Zone (EEZ), we are highly susceptible to Illegal
Unregulated and Unreported (IUU) fishing expeditions. Considering our
heavy reliance on our fisheries sector for livelihood and revenue, Kiribati
remains deeply concerned about the ongoing challenge of Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated fishing, which undermines not only our national
effort to sustainably manage marine resources but also global progress
toward achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. IUU fishing
significantly impacts our national economy by depleting fish stocks,
undermining sustainable fishing practices, and reducing revenue for local
fisheries. This threatens economic stability and the livelihoods of our people
dependent on fishing. We acknowledge the assistance of our partners
rendered in the addressing this gap and in providing surveillance support.
Kiribati calls upon the international community to strengthen cooperation and
action to address IUU fishing, ensuring that sustainable fisheries
management becomes a reality for all nations, especially those most

vulnerable to its impacts.

Kiribati is acutely aware of the profound significance of the ocean to our
livelihoods, culture and environment. The health of our marine ecosystem is
intrinsically linked to our nation’s well-being and to the well-being of future
generations. In this context the work of the International Seabed Authority is
of paramount importance. The sustainable and equitable management of the
seabed and its resources is essential not only for environmental protection
but also for ensuring that the benefits derived from these resources
contribute to the development and prosperity of all humankind, particularly
for Small Island developing States like Kiribati.

13|Page
Pact of the Future

Kiribati applauds the Secretary General for his great initiative for bringing the
whole world together to re-energize the United Nations, as it approaches its
80" year anniversary, so that it remains relevant and vital for the peace,
progress and prosperity of humanity in the future. The proposed Pact for the
Future offers an essential roadmap for strengthening global cooperation on
key issues, including climate change, digital transformation, and
peacebuilding. We fully support the development of the Global Digital
Compact, which will help bridge the digital divide and ensure that Small
Island Developing States (SIDS) like Kiribati are not left behind in the digital
age. It is vital that the international community take bold steps to strengthen
global governance mechanisms fostering inclusive multilateralism that
benefits all countries, particularly the most vulnerable. We believe that the
successes of these initiatives will be key to achieving sustainable

development, peace and security for future generations.

Mr. President

As | conclude, | express our hope for the future. Kiribati firmly believes that
together we can unite in action and commitment, ensuring that no country is
left behind in our pursuit of a more sustainable and in a world where peace,
sustainable development and human dignity are advanced for present and

future generations.

Mr. President

Let us make this 79° Session a time to renew our unity, solidarity and
togetherness for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and
human dignity for present and future generations. Together we can make it

and together we can do it.

14|Page
In conclusion, let's embrace our traditional blessings of Te Mauri, Te Raoi,
ao Te Tabomoa, which literally means Health, Peace, and Prosperity).

Thank you for your kind attention.

15|Page
