Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

820 Second Avenue, Suite 13A, New York, NY 10017
Tel: (212) 972-3105 Fax: (212) 972-3154 E-mail: dprk.un@verizon.net

Please check against delivery

Statement by Head of the DPRK Delegation
H.E. Mr. Kim Song,
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to the United Nations

At the General Debate of

the 79" session of the United Nations General Assembly

30 September 2024, New York
Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Distinguished representatives,

Allow me, first of all, to congratulate you, Mr. Philémon Yang, on your election
as President of the 79th session of the UN General Assembly.

I am confident that your able stewardship will lead this session to an excellent

fruition.
Mr. President,

The current session of the UNGA is convened at a time when the existence and

development of humanity is faced with unprecedented serious crises and challenges.

Armed conflicts and bloodshed continue unabated in various parts of the world,
with the situation in Gaza still going on for almost a year, taking the lives of tens of
thousands of innocent civilians and creating the most appalling humanitarian crisis
since WWII.

To make matters worse, ever-worsening abnormal weather conditions like
extreme high temperature, drought, torrential rain and flood cause massive human and
material losses, coupled with such problems as food and energy crisis, unemployment

and poverty and social inequality.

In addition, confrontation, bloc-forming and unilateralism prevail over the spirit
of cooperation, unity and multilateralism which run through the UN Charter, thus

creating obstacles to tiding over international crises.

Therefore, I expect that this general debate, true to its theme and spirit, will

serve as a significant occasion in overcoming the challenges and crises threatening
humanity’s existence and development, defending the UN-centered multilateral

system and promoting peace and advancement of the present and future generations.
Mr. President,

I consider it important for each and every UN member state to fully discharge its
responsibility with a view to overcoming present crises and promoting social progress

and better standards of living as stated in the UN Charter.

From this viewpoint I would like to outline the principled stand of the DPRK
government and its efforts directed to achieving socio-economic development,

defending regional peace and stability, and realizing international justice.

Today, the world is faced with challenges, with no exception to the DPRK as
well. However, valuable successes are being recorded in the socio-economic field,

thanks to the correct line of the government and its steady implementation.

First, the DPRK government puts it as the primary state policy to keep supplying
the children under school age with dairy products and provide school children with
essential stationary at state’s expense. As a result of the strenuous execution of the

policy, we witness continued improvement in the quality of children and education.

We also find an outcome of our effort to achieve sustainable development of the
national economy. The trend of growth continues in various fields such as light
industry and agriculture and remarkable successes are registered in promoting the
welfare of the people including the work to provide all residents of both urban and

rural areas with new dwelling houses free of charge.

In particular, the DPRK government newly adopted the policy for regional

development and is paying primary attention to its practical implementation.

The DPRK government’s regional development policy aims to effect epoch-
making enhancement in socio-economic, material and cultural standards on a

nationwide scale by bridging the gap between the capital and provincial cities,

2
between urban and rural areas and develop all sectors and regions of the country in a

balanced and simultaneous way within a 10-year timeframe.

This will be an active contribution of the DPRK to the attainment of the SDGs

on achieving sustainable development for everyone, ensuring no one is left behind.

The DPRK’s regional development policy is firmly assured of its feasibility as it

is based on scientific accuracy and justness.

In 10 years’ time, the world will witness a completely changed development of
the DPRK.

Mr. President,

Aforementioned work for socio-economic development in the DPRK is never

done in a peaceful and normal security environment.

Peaceful and stable external environment is very dear to us who aspire to overall
development and prosperity of the state. And yet, the security threat forced upon us

from the outside is all the more increasing with the passage of time.

Last year, I stated on this podium that the situation on the Korean peninsula was

nearing to brink of a nuclear conflict.

One year has passed since then. Now the security landscape of the Korean

peninsula is quite different from that time and becoming much more acute.

From the beginning of this year, the US. and its allies have staged joint military
exercises one after another with various code-names such as “Freedom Shield’,
“Freedom Edge” and “Combined Air Drill” in the vicinity of the DPRK, thus

heightening military tension and hostile atmosphere in the region.

Much more serious is the fact that the anti-DPRK nuclear war machine “nuclear

consultative group” engineered by the U.S. and ROK last year is now in full operation
and simulation nuclear war drills are conducted to put into practice an actual attempt

to use nuclear weapons against the DPRK.

Joining here are the member states of NATO which is an outside force beyond
the region and exclusive military bloc. They are strengthening military cooperation
with the U.S. and ROK abusing the signboard of “UN Command” which should have
been dismantled decades ago in accordance with UNGA resolution. They are stirring
up military confrontation still further by deploying warships and aircrafts in the hot

spot region of the Korean peninsula.

Such being the case, they blame us for “threatening” them and the peace and

stability of the region and beyond with nuclear weapons.

Then, who had developed and used nuclear weapons against humanity for the

first time in history?

Who has introduced nuclear weapons into the Korean peninsula in the last

century and posed nuclear threat to the DPRK over the century?

Who on earth is talking unhesitatingly about the “end of regime” of a sovereign
state and maintaining first-use of nuclear weapons against the DPRK as its national

policy?

It is not that the DPRK’s possession of nuclear weapons makes the U.S. hostile
towards us. The truth is that the U.S. hostility and nuclear threat to the DPRK for over

70 years compelled us to make a historic decision to possess nuclear weapons.

Our nuclear weapons were just made and exist to defend ourselves. As such, any

talk about our “nuclear threat” only proves a conceived hostility toward the DPRK.

The security environment of the Korean peninsula is bound to be intricately
complicated through to the next generation as well, unless the U.S. and its followers

change their confrontation and aggressive nature.
Under such circumstances, it is an indispensable exercise of sovereign rights for
the DPRK to maintain powerful strength capable of defending national security

interests and guaranteeing peaceful development.

The situation on the Korean peninsula has not entered into war even though it is
fraught with extreme tension. It is totally attributable to our country’s powerful war
deterrence which helps stave off threat of aggression and keep the balance of power in

the region.

Therefore, we continue to increase our war deterrence capabilities not only from
our obligation to ensure national security but also from our mission to maintain peace

and security in the region and beyond.

Comrade Kim Jong Un, President of the State Affairs of the DPRK, said that
we can choose either dialogue or confrontation but we should go further in getting
ourselves fully prepared for confrontation. This is the review and conclusion drawn
from the 30-year-long DPRK-USS. relations, he said.

When it comes to the right to self-defense, a legitimate right of a sovereign state,
we will never go back to the point in the far-off past. When it comes to the national
prestige, we will never bargain over it with anyone for it was gained through the

bloody struggle of the entire Korean people.

Whoever takes office in the U.S., we will only deal with the state entity called
the U.S., not the mere administration. Likewise, any U.S. administration will have to
face the DPRK which is different from what the U.S. used to think.

Mr. President,

It is the invariable external policy of the DPRK government to champion justice
and peace, aspire after progress and development and promote friendship and

solidarity. This is also the idea running through the UN Charter.
From this viewpoint, the DPRK government stands strongly against the acts of
dividing international political arena into two camps with unlawful double standards,

giving precedence to their hegemonic interests and disturbing peace and stability.

At present, many factors obstruct attainment of the SDGs set forth by the UN.
The most critical among them are the high-handedness, arbitrariness and double

standards of the U.S. and certain UN member states.

Since October last year, the indiscriminate massacre by Israeli authorities has
claimed more than 40 thousand Palestinian civilian lives in Gaza Strip including many

children and women, and thus exposed a nation to complete extinction.

The UN exists to prevent the recurrence of the scourge of war that had inflicted
untold sufferings to mankind. It is really shameful and deplorable that such act against

humanity has persisted for one year.

It is hardly imaginable that one state is immune to any censure and sanction even
after committing such a horrible massacre. This is entirely due to the patronage of the

U.S., a permanent member of the UN Security Council.

The U.S. has vetoed UNSC resolutions on bringing peace to the Middle East on
as many as 5 occasions overriding the wishes of the international community to see
the ethnic cleansing stopped by its ally. This is how the U.S. has discredited the

authority of UN and incited crime against humanity.

This notwithstanding, the U.S. is branding as “threat” and “provocation” the
legitimate exercise of the right to self-defense by a sovereign state which did not do

any harm to anybody.

As for the Ukrainian situation dragged on for almost 3 years by the U.S. and
western countries, they are shifting the responsibility on other countries even though it
was the result of “eastward expansion” of NATO and provision of lethal equipment

amounting to astronomical sum of money to their ally.
The reason behind the U.S.’s abusive invectives about the normal development
of relations between other countries is, in fact, to vindicate its unprincipled political
and military support to its ally and justify the forming of military alliances on a global

scale.

Justice or injustice is judged according to whether the actor is pro-U.S. or an
independent country and the United Nations is misused for political aims of an

individual country. Such reality should no longer be tolerated and allowed.

I once again express serious concern with strong denunciation over the fact that
peace and security in many parts of the world are seriously threatened and the spirit of
the UN Charter is debased by the arbitrariness and high-handedness of a single

arrogant permanent member state of the UN Security Council.

I also express deep condolences to the Palestinian victims of the Israeli genocide
and their bereaved families and extend unchanged support and solidarity to the Syrian
people in their struggle to regain the occupied Golan heights and safeguard territorial

integrity.
Mr. President,

The reform of the present global governance regime should be oriented to

realizing impartiality, equity and justice.

The United Nations will regain its sacred image only when it strictly adheres to
the principles of sovereign equality, non-interference in internal affairs, impartiality
and objectivity and eliminates high-handedness and arbitrariness as well as biased
double standards practices in all its activities in conformity with the purposes and

principles enshrined in the UN Charter.
Mr. President,

A just, peaceful and prosperous world remains the desire of the DPRK as ever.
It is the consistent stand of the DPRK government to make positive efforts with
independence against imperialism as its immutable first national policy to realize
international justice based on the respect for sovereignty, non-interference in internal

affairs, equality and mutual benefit and establish a new international order.

The DPRK will, in the future, too, cooperate with all countries and nations
which oppose and reject aggression, interference, domination and subordination and
aspire to independence and justice, transcending differences in idea and systems. We
will also develop diversified exchanges and cooperation with the countries that respect

our country and take friendly attitude to us.

Thank you.
