Check against delivery

Statement by
Deputy Prime-Minister — Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Kazakhstan H.E. Mr. Murat Nurtleu
during the General debate of the 79" session of the UNGA
(28 September 2024, New York)

Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,

Let me first congratulate His Excellency Philemon YANG onhis election as
the President of the 79% Session.
I assure him of my country’s full support and wish him every success in his

noble endeavours.
Excellencies,

As we gather here, the global system is dangerously close to a breaking point.
Dozens of our fellow Member States, represented in this august hall, are
gripped by conflict and instability, claiming many thousands of lives.

Entire continents are affected by the climate crisis.

Multilateralism is struggling to keep pace.

And yet, the United Nations is still the indispensable universal
Organization.

After almost eight decades it remains a vital platform for dialogue and
cooperation on the most acute issues of our time.

This undeniable fact compels states to keep working through the UN towards
a sustainable world.

It reinforces our determination to seek global peace and stability.

And this green podium, this hall, remind us that no nation, no matter how

powerful, can tackle global problems alone.

Excellencies,
2

The plight of millions of conflict victims worldwide, across the Middle East,
Eastern Europe and parts of Africa, deserve immediate, decisive and collective
action.

But the UN Security Council’s decision-making process is paralysed.

As underscored by the Secretary-General, this sad reality undermines the
credibility, legitimacy and effectiveness of the Organization as a whole.

Having annual discussions about reforming global institutions is no longer
enough.

It is time to enact the change our world so desperately needs.

Last year, from this podium, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev of
Kazakhstan introduced the Initiative of World Unity for a Just Peace and Harmony.

This visionary framework seeks to cultivate peace, stability, and security
through meaningful and equitable engagement between the Global South and
Global North.

The voices of Middle Powers and developing nations are vital in bridging
divides and nurturing a more effective international security architecture.

It is in this spirit that I invite all nations to embrace my country’s initiative.

Together, we can pave the way for a more harmonious and united world.

Excellencies,

The pressing risk of another nuclear arms race is exacerbating geopolitical
polarization.

For over four decades, Kazakhstan’s people and land were subjected to the
devastating effects of 456 nuclear tests.

Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are key pillars of my country’s
foreign policy.

Kazakhstan is therefore deeply concerned by the escalating rhetoric of
nuclear threats.

We appeal to all nuclear states to adhere to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

also urge those countries who have not joined the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) to do so as soonas possible for the safety, stability
and survival of our world.

As the Chair of the 3"! Meeting of the TPNW, we will promote establishment

of an International Trust Fund for assistance to victims of nuclear testing.
Excellencies,

Another existential threat no nation can afford to ignore is climate change.

This year is expected to be the hottest on record.

Droughts, floods, and other weather calamities continue to cost lives and
damage economies around the globe.

We therefore call again on G-20 countries and multilateral development
banks to share the burden by providing green technologies and concessional
financing to low- and middle-income countries in line with the Paris Agreement.

Our region stands on the frontline of global warming despite accounting for
only | percent of global emissions.

Central Asia will face an above average 2.5 degree increase in temperatures by
2050.

This sober reality has deepened our commitment to addressing climate
change.

That is why my country will host a
Regional Climate Summit in 2026, aimed at further enhancing cooperation among

UN members on climate resilience and green transition.

Excellencies,

One of the consequences of climate change is water scarcity across the world.

It undermines food, energy, and ecological systems on every continent.

One in four people today lacks access to safe drinking water.

If this trend continues, by 2050 more than five billion could suffer water
shortages.

In Central Asia by that time water deficiency will affect 25 to 30% of the
population.

Meeting this challenge requires both serious political will and scientific and
economic resources.

As the current Chair of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea,
Kazakhstan is working with regional partners on a long-term and sustainable
cooperation mechanism for the effective use of water and energy resources in
Central Asia.
4

Our approach takes into account the interests of all stakeholders in irrigation,
hydropower and environmental protection.

Excellencies,

As the largest landlocked country, Kazakhstan actively promotes the
interests of all LLDC countries in addressing the multifaceted challenges our
group faces.

Despite significant strides, we are still far from implementing the Vienna
Programme of Action.

We are lagging on critical indicators — particularly the adoption of
innovative technologies for trade facilitation and the development of transit and
transport corridors.

These challenges magnify the vulnerability of LLDCs, choke off
investment, diminish trade, and escalate the debt burden.

Furthermore, our geographical constraints prevent us from integrating fully
into global trade and economic processes on an equal footing.

We are dedicated to advancing our group’s vital interests globally and
regionally.

My country is already a bridge for 80% of overland transit cargo traffic
between Asia and Europe.

Kazakhstan is committed to strengthening synergies between the Belt and
Road project, the Global Gateway Initiative, and the North-South and Trans-
Caspian International Transport Route corridors.

Together, we have the unique potential to transform our landlocked status into
land-linked connectivity.

Excellencies,

The Summit of the Future distinctly highlighted digital transformation as
the driving force behind the 2030 Agenda.

But the true key to this shift is ensuring every nation has equitable access to
cutting-edge technology.
5

The rapid development of AI exacerbates cyber threats and brings new
challenges.

This includes its potential uses in warfare, the consequences for data
privacy, the risks of misuse for information wars, deepfakes and more.

Kazakhstan believes the UN can and must play a leading role in this
revolutionary field.

We urge technologically and digitally advanced states to take an active part in
developing common ethics and standards to govern AI in the most responsible and
peaceful way.

The establishment of a UN AI Office would be a welcome step in this

direction.

Excellencies,
In the current geopolitical landscape, Central Asia is increasingly asserting

itself in global affairs.

Our region is not only a crossroads of cultures and economies but is also
rapidly transforming into a bridge for cooperation between East and West.

We adhere to the formula: “Successful Central Asia — Successful
Kazakhstan”.

Along with our partners we are building a more connected and resilient
Central Asia through a set of “C5+” dialogue platforms.

Today our regional agenda also includes the development of Afghanistan
into a stable and predictable state, a reliable trade partner.

In this context, the UN Regional Centre on Sustainable Development for
Central Asia and Afghanistan in Almaty will be a game-changer for coordinated SDG
delivery.

We do hope this innovative undertaking will receive broad support from
Member States.

Excellencies,

Upholding human rights is not merely an aspiration, but one of the key
prerequisites of sustainable development.

It is also the best antidote against those inequalities that are often the root
cause of instability and conflicts.
6

Our national reforms aim to build a
Just and Fair Kazakhstan based on inclusivity, transparency and the rule of law.
My country has abolished the death penalty, instituted a zero-tolerance
policy against torture, and strengthened national preventive mechanisms.
To reinforce our commitment to the values of life and humanity, Kazakhstan,
along with our Central Asian neighbours and Mongolia, is spearheading the
initiative to become the first region entirely free of the death penalty.
Safeguarding women's rights and ensuring children's safety are top

priorities of my President and Government.

We are advancing the UN Human Rights Council agenda by proposing
impactful resolutions focused on child education and combating domestic
violence.

Being one of the champions of repatriation of women and children from
conflict zones in the Middle East, Kazakhstan will host an International
Conference in 2025 on best practices in the field of repatriation and
reintegration.

Through partnerships with UN Volunteers, we are creating new opportunities
for young people and actively promoting 2026 as the International Year of

Volunteers for Sustainable Development.

Excellencies,

Ladies and gentlemen,

Both athome and on the global stage, Kazakhstan and its people stand resolute
in our commitment to build a peaceful, prosperous and sustainable future.

Central to this mission is our unwavering dedication to the 2030
Sustainable Development Agenda, embodying our shared aspirations for
humanity.

As we look ahead to the 80" anniversary of the United Nations next year, I
urge all states to unite in fully implementing this ambitious agenda.

We have the chance to transform this upcoming historical milestone into a
true celebration of shared achievements.
7

Let the Summit of the Future and this UN General Assembly session mark
the beginning of a transformative journey towards a brighter and more inclusive

future for all of us, our children, and coming generations.

I thank you.
