Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Statement by

His Excellency Mr. Sonexay SIPHANDONE,
Prime Minister of the Lao PDR
At the General Debate of the 79" Session of the United
Nations General Assembly

(15 minutes)

New York, 27 September 2024

(Please check against delivery)
— Mr. President,
— Excellcies,
— Ladies and gentlemen,

At the outset, I would like to express my sincere congratulations to you,
Excellency Philemon Yang on your election as the President of the 79" Session of
the United Nations General Assembly. I have full confidence that with your
extensive diplomatic experience and wisdom, you shall successfully lead this
August Assembly under the theme of “Leaving no one behind: acting together for
the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present
and future generations” which is of most importance and relevance to the current
global situation. In the same vein, I would like to commend His Excellency Denis
Francis for successful conduct of his tenure as the President of the General
Assembly.

Mr. President,

Today, the international community is facing multifaceted challenges taking
place across various regions, such as geo-political tensions, armed conflicts,
economic and financial crisis, ever more frequent and devastating natural disasters
resulting from climate change, rising poverty and wide spreading of social unrests
worldwide, among others. These remain real threats to international peace, stability
and security, and obstacles to national development efforts of member states, as
well as the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, leaving many
countries that have yet to fully recover from the impacts of Covid-19 with
exacerbated economic and financial difficulties. Against this backdrop, I have
witnessed that Member States have strived to enhance cooperation, both through
the multilateral frameworks and regional mechanisms, to jointly address the
pressing issues, aiming at creating an environment conducive for maintenance of
peace which is the most fundamental condition for sustainable development.

However, these challenges that we are facing are much more fragile and
could lead to more dire consequences and potentially re-shape the current and
future international peace and security landscape, especially the geo-political
tensions that are becoming more confrontational, and widening division, all of
which require immediate attention including the prolongated conflicts in Gaza,
Ukraine and many countries in Africa.
The Lao PDR is deeply concerned with the ongoing armed-conflict that is
gravitating towards spilling over the entire Middle East region, which would
consequence in even more humanitarian crisis for innocent civilians. Therefore, we
maintain our consistent support to all international efforts aimed at achieving a
permanent ceasefire and cessation of all violence in Gaza and the adjacent areas, as
the fundamental condition for safe and unhindered humanitarian access for the
people, as well as rapid peace agreement negotiation. The Lao PDR reiterates its
support for the two-state solution for the Palestinian issue, where Palestine and
Israel coexist in peace in accordance with the relevant UN resolutions, and calls for
respect for the inalienable and legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and for
creating necessary condition for Palestine to become a full-fledged member of the
United Nations.

Mr. President,

Many countries all over the world, including the Lao PDR, have experienced
and suffered firsthand the consequences of war and solving disputes by force,
which directly endanger peace and security with unpredictable destruction to
innocent lives. As such, the only way to solve disputes at all levels, with a view
towards sustainable peace, is to begin with building mutual trust along with
diplomatic negotiations based on respect for sovereignty and adherence to the
fundamental principles of international law and the UN Charter.

I am of the view that the international community must ascend to its required
responsibility and political commitment that lead to tangible results, based on
international principles, to address various issues at hand, as well as emerging
challenges in the future. Simultaneously, we must further enhance our development
cooperation and global partnership, ensuring the concrete implementation of the
2030 Agenda for sustainable development, together with the outcomes of the
Summit of the Future that world leaders just endorsed most recently, based on the
promotion of multilateralism with the UN at its core, to adequately and timely
respond to the needs of the international community.

It is my view that the application of unilateral coercive measures is against
the principles of the UN Charter and International Law. These measures have
severely and disproportionately affected the innocent people and obstructed
development progress in many countries. On that account, we reiterate our
unwavering support, in line with the calls of the international community, for

2
ending the economic embargo against Cuba and removing it from the “list of State
Sponsors of Terrorism” and removal of all unilateral coercive measures against any
Sovereign State.

Mr. President,

The Lao PDR has the honour to assume the ASEAN Chairmanship in 2024
for the third time under the theme “ASEAN: Enhancing Connectivity and
Resilience” aiming at building ASEAN to be a more connected and resilient
Community through the implementation of 2024 ASEAN priorities and initiatives.
The theme is reflective of the Lao PDR’s national policy and objective to turn itself
from being a land-locked country to a regional connectivity hub. The theme is also
in line with ASEAN's common goal of building a more connected, integrated and
resilient region that is able to respond effectively and timely to emerging
challenges amidst regional and global complex and rapidly changing landscapes,
thereby contributing to the global common cause of maintaining peace, stability
and security as well as sustainable development in the region and the world.

Importantly, this year, ASEAN is focusing on developing strategic plans in each
pillar as well as the ASEAN Community Vision 2045 towards a Resilient,
Innovative, Dynamic, and People-Centred Community as well as_ the
implementation of the UN Sustainable Development Agenda. In addition, ASEAN
is accelerating the accession process to admit Timor-Leste as a full member of
ASEAN in the near future.

On the developments in Myanmar, the Lao PDR, as the ASEAN Chair,
continues to uphold the ASEAN’s commitment to assisting Myanmar in finding a
peaceful and durable solution to the ongoing problem in Myanmar through the
implementation of the Five-Point Consensus, based on Myanmar-owned and
Myanmar-led process. The Lao PDR will continue to engage with relevant
stakeholders, aiming at building a conducive environment to the implementation of
the Five-Point Consensus, including the inclusive national dialogue and
humanitarian assistance.

Mr. President,

The Lao PDR remains steadfast to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals, focusing on socio-economic development together with environment
protection and reduction of poverty. Last July, the Lao PDR presented its third

3
Voluntary National Review of the SDGs implementation at the 2024 High-level
Political Forum, which demonstrated that there remains slow progress and off-track
goals. Among them, the implementation of the National SDG 18: “Lives safe from
Unexploded Ordinance”, has made progress in varying degrees. However, the
unexploded ordinance remains a major threat to the lives of the Lao people and
pose obstacles to the national development while hindering the progress of other
SDGs. We, therefore, take this opportunity to call upon the international
community to provide predictable and adequate support and assistance to the Lao
PDR in addressing this long overdue and challenging problem, in accordance with
the Convention on Cluster Munitions.

The Lao PDR is of the view that one of the main obstacles to implementing
the SDGs is insufficient funding. As such, there is an urgent need to reform
international financial architecture through the collaboration among the UN
Development system, Development Partners and the International Financial
Institutions while promoting the participation of the developing countries in
international economic decision-making, norm-setting and global economic
governance. Currently, it is our view that the UN Development system, at all levels,
must enhance its role in cooperating with and providing support to the member
states, especially the Least Developed Countries, Land-locked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States, in order to help tackle their special
needs and challenges.

Another key factor that can help accelerate national development efforts is
the role of science, technology and innovation, including artificial intelligence, in
facilitating Green Growth and Digitalization that is environmentally friendly and
investment in carbon capture and storage. Thus, the Lao PDR calls on the
international community to facilitate access and transfer of appropriate technology
and innovation to help leapfrog the development, including support for the
implementation of strategic plan and vision for the development of digital economy
of the Lao PDR.

Furthermore, I am of the view that Human Capital is another decisive factor.
Presently, one-third of the Lao population are within the age range of 10 to 24,
making the Lao PDR the nation with the youngest population in Southeast Asia and
those figures are projected to continuously increase for the next 10 years. At the
same time, the working age population is expected to increase around 67% of the
total population by 2030, as compared to 63% in 2020. The Government of the

4
Lao PDR has invested in its Human Capital Development in order to reap the
benefits of its demographic dividend. As part of such efforts, the Government of
the Lao PDR organized the first Human Capital Summit on Education in 2023 and
the second Summit on Nutrition in 2024, aimed at enhancing education quality,
basic healthcare and nutrition of the Lao people.

On graduation from the Least Developed Country status, the Lao
Government has adopted the Lao PDR Smooth Transition Strategy for LDC
Graduation by 2026 and Beyond. From the result of the triennial review by the UN
Committee for Development Policy in early 2024, the Lao PDR continues to meet
all 3 thresholds for graduation by 2026. However, given the current situation, we
are of the view that there remains the necessity for us to continue to focus our
forces and efforts to cope with external shocks and address domestic economic and
financial difficulties as well as impacts of natural disasters including the ongoing
floodings, in cooperation with the United Nations and development partners in
order for the Lao PDR to be able to overcome the various obstacles and continue its
development momentum towards a smooth, quality and sustainable graduation
from the LDC status.

Mr. President,

I would like to take this opportunity to commend the international
community for the success outcome of the Summit of the Future which has
reaffirmed strong commitments of the world leaders to supporting multilateralism,
maintenance of peace and promotion of international cooperation for sustainable
development through the adoption of the “Pact for the Future” which focuses on the
current challenges of the world and building a better future for the future
generations.

In this connection, the Global Digital Compact (GDC) has set the goals to
eliminate all obstacles and facilitate digital cooperation at the international level,
while also ensuring that technological advancement contributes to the acceleration
of the SDGs achievement. The Lao PDR always take into consideration our
common responsibility for future generations, and thus highly values the adoption
of the Declaration on Future Generations which prescribes the principles and
commitments to protecting our world peace and stability, ensuring equal access to
social services, information and innovation while addressing impacts of climate
change, among others. All of these will help ensure the sustainability of our planet

5
in which the future generations could continue the utilization of natural resources in
the future.

Despite being one of the least emission polluting countries in the world, the
Lao PDR, like many other countries, has encountered severe consequences of
climate change and natural disasters. Hence, the Lao PDR has adopted its National
Strategic Plan on Climate Change and committed to contributing to the
international efforts in addressing climate change. Allow me to take this
opportunity to congratulate all on the success of the High-level meeting on Sea-
level Rise on 25 September 2024, which has reiterated the need for strong
international cooperation to address climate change. Notwithstanding the fact that
the Lao PDR is landlocked, we stand ready to contribute to the international efforts
to protect the environment, while calling for support measures to further increase
adaptation capacity and resilience for responding to future impacts.

Mr. President,

Last but not least, I would like to reaffirm the consistent support of the
Government of the Lao PDR to the multilateralism and the principles stipulated in
the UN Charter and International Law. The Lao PDR continues to uphold its
cooperation with the member states of the UN and regional countries to contribute
to the cause of maintaining peace and security, promoting prosperity of all nations
worldwide as well as overcoming the challenges of today and achieving the
sustainable development goals, in order to provide enabling condition for a bright
future of the current and new generations.

I thank you.
