PERMANENT MISSION OF SAINT LUCIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS

STATEMENT BY

THE HONOURABLE ALVA R. BAPTISTE

MINISTER FOR EXTERNAL AFFAIRS, INTERNATIONAL TRADE, CIVIL AVIATION AND
DIASPORA AFFAIRS

TO THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE

79 SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

NEW YORK

FRIDAY, 27th SEPTEMBER, 2024

Please check against delivery.

Distinguished Mr. President, I begin my address to the 79'* Session of the UN General
Assembly by invoking the authority of the late Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Quote: “We are
now faced with the fact that tomorrow is today. We are confronted with the fierce
urgency of now. In this unfolding conundrum of life and history, there “is” such a thing as
being too late. This is no time for apathy or complacency. This is a time for vigorous and
positive action” Unquote.

Mr. President, over the decades, we the representatives of Small Island Developing States
have come to this hallowed chamber to state the case for fairer treatment of our
developmental needs and our challenges by the international community. We have argued
for special and differential treatment because we are indeed different, indeed special, and
indeed unique in our sizes, our economies, our finances, our social circumstances, our

vulnerabilities.

Mr. President, we are indeed severely disadvantaged by an unfair global financial system
that has amplified its inequities by the measurements and standards it has employed to
assess our development; and despite our best efforts, it seems that we were simply
engaging in odes to the deaf because there has hardly been the type of concrete and
fundamental responses and actions to change the rules and the systems that have been

suppressing our developmental aspirations.

However, Mr. President we have persisted in our advocacy; we have not abandoned our
faith in the strength and advantages of multilateralism. And so today we are pleased to
applaud two recent decisions by the International Community that provide an expectation
that the unique vulnerabilities and special circumstances of Saint Lucia and other Small

Island Developing States will receive the particular attention they deserve.

I speak first of the Fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States
recently held in Antigua and Barbuda, which adopted a new ten-year plan of action for
SIDS.

The Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS (ABAS) is a bold new plan to give priority at
the international level to the sustainable development needs of SIDS over the next ten
years and maps out the nature of the support which the International Community must

deliver in order to achieve them.
Through this Agenda the economies of SIDS can be transformed and so there must be
absolutely no delay in its implementation and in delivering on the commitments made to

bring life to its provisions. This cannot wait!

The second decision that we applaud is the recent adoption by the United Nations, of the
Multidimensional Vulnerability Index (MVI).

While we note that that the resolution advancing the MVI calls for its voluntary adoption,
Saint Lucia urges the international community to speedily adopt and implement the MVI.

It took the international Community thirty- two years to develop and adopt this vital and
necessary tool for sustainable development and global equity. Let us not wait another
thirty-two years to test and implement it. The MVI must be brought into use today. This

cannot wait!

It is urgent Mr. President, because the challenges facing our small, open and vulnerable
economies are quite complex. Caribbean economies have, over the past two decades, been
plagued by a number of inter-related and inter-locking factors including persistent fiscal
deficits and high debt, stubborn and persistent structural rigidities.

These inter-related factors, Mr. President, have been significantly exacerbated by external
shocks, including frequent and major fluctuations in energy prices, financial crises, and
more recently, the Covid Pandemic and the Russian-Ukraine war; not to mention the
planet’s greatest existential threat; climate change.

In this regard, Mr President, there is a pressing need for immediate action to halt and
reverse the slow progress that is being made on the issue of climate change and climate
justice. This General Assembly needs no reminders of the violent and destructive impact
of climate change and the extent of the peril in which the world, particularly SIDS, finds

itself as a result.

Saint Lucia is considerably dismayed and disappointed that after years of advocacy by
SIDS, to establish the Loss and damage Fund at COP28, the fund, which should have been
activated in July this year is yet to be operationalised.

Saint Lucia therefore urges those concerned to swiftly and urgently operationalise the Loss
and Damage Fund so that SIDS can receive timely support and on the scale required to

recover from the disastrous impact of climatic events on their small economies and
societies. Further, it is essential that at the forthcoming COP 29, the special circumstances
of SIDS are protected and operationalised across the entire Climate Change Policy agenda.

This cannot wait!

Mr President, in the same way the world must recompense SIDS for the injustice of the
climate crisis that we are suffering, those countries, which propelled their economic
development through the unholy and inhumane transatlantic slave trade and slavery of
our African ancestors, must pay reparations for this crime against humanity which they
inflicted upon the people they brought from Africa to the Caribbean and the Americas as
well as on the indigenous peoples of those regions.

Mr. President, Saint Lucia therefore reiterates the call it made at the 78th session of the
UNGA, that the UN should become seized of the question of reparations for the
transatlantic slave trade and slavery in the western hemisphere. This is why, in part, our

Caribbean civilization resents the current carnage in Gaza and the West Bank.

Because in Gaza, Mr. President, for the last year, over 41,000 persons- the majority being
women and children - have been killed by an Israeli army in the name of self-defence
occasioned by a terrorist attack on Israel on October 7, 2023 in which about 1200 persons
were killed. Saint Lucia condemns terrorism in all its forms, by whomever and whatever

commits it.

But, humanitarianism has been lost in the carnage. Since October last year, 289 aid
workers, including 207 UNWRA team members, have been killed in Gaza. In addition,
more than 110 journalists have been killed.

Mr. President, this war in Palestine, what some have referred to as genocide, whatever it is

called, must be brought to an end today, for the world has no future with it.

Mr. President, year-in year-out, since its independence, Saint Lucia has been calling for the
recognition and establishment of a Palestinian State. However, to date there continues to
be needless impediments to this accomplishment. Mr. President, I respectfully submit that
this unnecessary undermining of Palestinian statehood is, to a large extent, the root cause

of the current Israeli/Palestinian conflict.

Mr. President Israelis and Palestinians deserve to live side-by-side in peace. However,

peace for Israel must not come at the expense of the Palestinian people; nor can a
permanent ceasefire be based on the whims and fancies of Israel. Mr. President it must be
predicated upon meaningful and honest negotiations — utilizing the tools of diplomacy.
Hence, no state should become material accomplices to aggression against the Israeli and
Palestinian people; because the solution is not far- fetched or unreachable.

The Palestinians must be allowed to exercise their right to self-determination, to have their
own state and full membership of the United Nations alongside the State of Israel, in
accordance with UN Resolutions that go back to 181 of 1947 and include
Resolution 3236 of 1974 which reaffirmed the unassailable rights of the Palestinian people
to self-determination, national independence and sovereignty, and the right of the
Palestinians to return to their homes and property.

Mr. President, the only way to secure a just and peaceful future in the Middle East and for
Israel to have secure borders is for the Palestinian people to live in their own
internationally recognised homeland. The right to self-determination is a universal right.
And the Palestinians are no exception! The people of Palestine cannot wait!

It is this same right which says that the people of Ukraine must be allowed to choose their
own destiny and that Russia must end this unwarranted war against Ukraine and restore

and respect the territorial integrity of Ukraine.

It is this same right of self-determination which dictates that the heroic people of Cuba
have a right to determine their own path to political, economic and social development
and that the economic embargo imposed on Cuba for the last sixty-four years by the
United States is illegal, unjust, and inhumane. It must be ended forthwith, in accordance
with the many resolutions of the UN General Assembly from 1992, which have rejected
that embargo totally and overwhelmingly. The people of Cuba cannot wait!

Further, Cuba’s emphasis on Medical Internationalism as its central foreign policy
objective as well as its non-involvement in armed conflicts abroad invalidate Cuba’s
inclusion on the US’s list of countries sponsoring terrorism. Instead, Mr. President, given
that it is well established that Cuba’s alternative model of development has provided
important social benefits to the Cuban people coupled with its emphasis on Medical
Internationalism it should be on a list of countries acting together for the advancement of
peace, sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations. No
one must be left behind!
It is this same right to self-determination that says that the 23.5 million people of the
Republic of China on Taiwan have the right to be a member of the UN and other
international organisations and that the UN resolution 2758 of 1971 does not preclude
Taiwan’s inclusion and participation in the United Nations system. We believe that
Taiwan, with the 20" largest economy in the world and with its important role in
technological development and world trade has much to offer from which the
international community can benefit. No one Must be left Behind!

It is this same right to self-determination that says that the People and Government of the
Bolivian Republic of Venezuela must be allowed to conduct their internal affairs without
sanctions imposed upon them by other States.

Mr. President, in Haiti the situation remains unstable and deeply concerning although
some political advances have been registered through the efforts of CARICOM’s Eminent
Persons Group of three former Prime Ministers.

However, the International Community has only provided 14% of the resources required
for the Multilateral Security Support Mission for Haiti (MSS). We welcome the
announcement from the President of Kenya this week that it will deploy 600 more security
forces to Haiti by November and we thank the Government of Kenya for its support of the
Haitian people. The funding required for humanitarian assistance in Haiti is also woefully
short of its target. We therefore call upon all other countries which had pledged to assist
Haiti to urgently and immediately fulfil their commitments to do so. Haiti Cannot Wait!

In view of the foregoing, to safeguard the future, we have to be prepared to take action
now, this moment, this very minute, at this time, on certain issues that are essential for a
peaceful and sustainable future; and we cannot and must not be selective about which
declarations of the Pact or of the principles of the Charter of the UN that we will respect

and when we will do so.

Mr. President, in the convening of the Summit of the Future this week and in the theme
that is guiding the deliberations of this 79th Session of the General Assembly, the
international community has seemingly come to understand that it can no longer

procrastinate, no longer delay, the actions needed to secure a better future for mankind.

Let us for once therefore turn our words into actions. The time for action is now!
The time to make multilateralism truly work, not just for SIDS, but for all of us, is now!
The time for reform of the Security Council is now!

The time for Climate Justice for SIDS is now!

The time to end the conflicts, the genocides, the wars is now!

The time to give the youth of this planet, who are the people of tomorrow, the hope and
the opportunities to better themselves is now!

The time to put humanity first is, is now!

If we act together now, today, for peace, for sustainable development, for justice, no one
will be left behind and there will be a better tomorrow!

Consequently, Mr. President, if we do not act with the fierce urgency of now our UN
speeches and resolutions, in the words of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. “will end up as a
meaningless drama on the stage of history...shrouded with ugly garments of shame”.

Mr. President I thank you and yield the floor.
