STATEMENT BY
HIS EXCELLENCY JOSEPH NYUMA BOAKAT, SR.
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA
TO THE
79" SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS, NEW YORK.

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 2024

H.E. Philemon Yangon, President of the 79th Session of the
United Nations General Assembly;

H.E. Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United
Nations

Excellencies, Heads of State and Government;

Ambassadors;

Heads of Delegations and Esteemed Delegates;

Distinguished ladies and Gentlemen:

I am honored to address the 79th Regular Session of the United Nations
General Assembly for the first time as President on behalf of the
Government and People of Liberia after a smooth back-to-back democratic
transition.

Liberia congratulates His Excellency Philemon Yangon on his election as
President of the Seventy-ninth (79th) Session of the United Nations General
Assembly. You can be assured of Liberia's support as you steer the affairs
of General Assembly.

I extol His Excellency, Dennis Francis, for his astute leadership during his
presidency of the Seventy-eighth (78th) Session of the General Assembly
and commend his determination to inspire and rekindle hope globally.

I deeply thank Secretary-General ANTONIO GUTERRES for the remarkable
and visionary leadership he continues to provide in pursuit of our collective
mandate.

MR. PRESIDENT, EXCELLENCIES, DISTINGUISHED LADIES AND
GENTLEMEN;

In the summer of 1945, Liberia joined other nations in San Francisco as one
of the original signatories to the United Nations Charter.

Page 1|6
On that fateful day, the world, having suffered the scourge of war, was full
of hope and determined to reverse the past.

Nearly eighty years on, and reflecting on the Preamble of the United Nations
Charter, which declares our commitment to ‘promote social progress and
better standards of life in larger freedom,’ we ask the question: has our
reaffirmation of “faith ... in the dignity and worth of the human person ...”
made eight decades ago been realized?

We must admit that the world has changed and the frontiers that we now
embrace are different. Innate greed, insensitivity to the poor, the
international drug epidemic, money launderings, dynamics of climate
change and the impact of social media must compel us to rethink our
approach to global peace and security. Our beloved United Nations must
undergo the institutional and philosophical reflections required to respond
to this new age.

As we assemble under the theme, ‘Unity in Diversity for the Advancement
of Peace, Sustainable Development, and Human Dignity for Everyone
Everywhere.’ It is important to recognize the shared values and collective
efforts that come from our unity within diversity.

We must acknowledge these as essential for advancing peace, sustainable
development, and the inherent dignity of every human being worldwide. By
doing so, we can build a better world where no one is left behind. Like many
nations gathered at this assembly, Liberia re-commits to the Sustainable
Development Goals.

Since the end of the country’s conflict, we have strived to follow a
development path that will lead to building a capable state. Twelve years
ago, we dared to dream of a future within the realm of possibility, harboring
core national aspiration to transform the future. Named Liberia Rising or
Vision 2030, it has been the driving force behind all our planning efforts.
The building blocks and tenets of Vision 2030 are significantly aligned with
the Sustainable Development Goals.

Our Government's ARREST Agenda is a comprehensive approach developed
to address the economic and social needs of millions of Liberians, especially
the youth, who account for sixty percent of the population. With an
emphasis on agriculture, roads and infrastructure development, justice and
the rule of law, education, sanitation, health, and tourism, the agenda has
mainstreamed the SDGs and is designed to take Liberia to the "finish" line
of the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

Page 2|6
The fight against poverty and the promotion of human dignity is a steadfast
commitment. Despite our progress, poverty remains a significant challenge,
with over half of our population living below the poverty line.

The Sustainable Development Goals aim to eradicate poverty in all its forms
by 2030, ensure social protection for the poor and vulnerable, and improve
access to essential services. Liberia is dedicated to assessing the levels and
causes of poverty and implementing strategies to reduce it and promote
shared prosperity.

My Government also acknowledges the pressing need to address maternal
and newborn mortality by implementing robust monitoring and evaluation
of health services in the country to accelerate the reduction of maternal and
newborn mortality.

We are particularly pleased with the United Nations H6 Joint Mission to
Liberia earlier this year, which concluded with a commitment to combat the
high burden of increasing newborn deaths.

We welcome the UN General Assembly’s decision to declare July 25th as the
International Day of Women and Girls of African descent this year. This
significant milestone acknowledges that women and girls of African descent
have unique challenges and that the global fight against slavery and racism
is necessary to achieve gender equality.

Liberia credits its credentials by producing the first woman President of the
UN General Assembly, Angie Brooks Randolph, and the first female
President of Africa, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. Liberia has witnessed
and continues to witness the immense contributions of women and girls of
African descent to politics, culture and in every area of societal
development.

EXCELLENCIES, DISTINGUISHED LADIES AND GENTLEMEN;

Liberia has enjoyed uninterrupted peace for almost two decades following
14 years of civil conflict. During this time, we have held four democratic
elections, with last year's election marking the fourth since the return to
democratic order in 2006.

In January of this year, Liberia achieved a historic milestone by peacefully
transitioning from one democratic government to another. This progress is
significant because, before the 2018 transition, the last democratic
transition occurred in 1944, about 74 years earlier.

Page 3|6
We are gradually fostering and solidifying a democratic culture, ensuring
that democracy is here to stay in Liberia. Now it is time for our people to
reap the democratic dividends.

The rule of law is fundamental for peace, justice, strong institutions, and
dignity for the human person. Liberia is taking significant strides toward
openness, transparency, and accountability by empowering and supporting
transparency institutions. Our Government is committed to implementing
audit recommendations by the General Audit Commission to restore public
and donors’ confidence in the governance system andimprove regional and
international cooperation.

In addition, the country has taken a major step in confronting its conflict
past to ensure accountability and justice for crimes and other human rights
violations committed during the war and promote healing and national
reconciliation. A significant development in our transitional justice process
was the signing on May 2, 2024, of Executive Order 131 to create the Office
for the establishment of War and Economic Crimes Courts for Liberia, a key
recommendation from the truth and reconciliation process in Liberia.

Our actions align with the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, Joint Follow-Up on Impunity, and Past Human Rights Violations. As
we embark on this process and acknowledge the enormity of this task, my
government seeks the support of the United Nations, partners, and
stakeholders in the pursuit of justice for victims, peace, and reconciliation.

Liberia is facing a drug crisis that is affecting our youth and jeopardizing the
country's future. This epidemic, driven by international criminal enterprises
and their networks, poses a severe threat. In response, we have not only
declared the drug epidemic a health emergency and a national security
threat, but we have also taken steps to address this issue by establishing a
dedicated national body to tackle drug abuse in Liberia. I urge the
international community to join Liberia in addressing the escalating drug
crisis.

EXCELLENCIES, DISTINGUISHED LADIES AND GENTLEMEN;

The world is facing numerous crises, including global threats such as
diseases, security, and climate change, as well as food and resource
shortages.

Our vulnerabilities are evident, and we need to use our collective knowledge
to find solutions that will preserve the planet for future generations.

Page 4|6
Climate change is undeniably real, and its threat to our environment and
way of life is becoming increasingly apparent. We must take urgent action
to address this threat, including cooperative efforts to implement Article 6.2
of the Paris Agreement.

Liberia, as the most forested country in West Africa with over half of its land
covered by forests, plays a vital role in biodiversity and environmental
sustainability. As a result, our country is taking important steps to lead the
conversation on climate action.

My Government has called on our Legislature and other stakeholders to
begin looking at the Paris Agreement, particularly under Article 6 to help
advance actions towards establishing Liberia’s Nationally Determined
Contribution to combat climate change.

While we take these actions, we are mindful of the need to build capacity
and invest in critical areas of our economy such as using alternative
financing for investmentin the blue and green economy, and technological
transfer to support these climate actions.

EXCELLENCIES, DISTINGUISHED LADIES AND GENTLEMEN;

The goals we set for ourselves and the future are better served on the
foundation of peace and security. Having enjoyed peace for over two
decades following a long-running conflict, we aim to promote peace and
stability at home, in the region, and globally.

The threat of conflicts to our shared world underscores the importance of
collaborative efforts to foster regional and global stability and peace.
Therefore, we support all the UN's efforts to address peace and security
issues worldwide.

Liberia is concerned about the escalating security challenges in the West
African region, including terrorism and economic and political instability.
These pose a significant threat to regional peace, so we urge full dialogue
and cooperation among West African nations to address these issues
effectively.

Meanwhile, Liberia firmly stands with the rest of West Africa in the resolve
to maintain our fifty-year-old regional economic commission (ECOWAS)
intact. We oppose efforts to disintegrate our union and will not accept the

Page 5|6
region being used for proxy conflicts. We look to the AU and the UN to
support us in keeping the regional body united.

Similarly, at the global level, we call for an immediate ceasefire in the Middle
East to provide civilians with essential humanitarian relief. We urge both the
Israelis and Palestinians to engage in negotiations toward lasting peace,
including a two-state solution. Additionally, we see the ongoing conflict in
Ukraine as a threat to global peace and security. Therefore, there is an
urgent need for a peaceful resolution that also respects Ukraine’s territorial

integrity.

MR. PRESIDENT, EXCELLENCIES, DISTINGUISHED LADIES AND
GENTLEMEN;

This year’s assembly is a pivotal moment for Liberia's bid to ascend to the
African non-permanent seat of the UN Security Council 2026. As we proudly
announce our candidacy, we look forward to the support of member states
to vote Liberia overwhelmingly to the non-member seat of the Security
Council, where we can work with Council members to promote peace,
justice, and security.

Liberia is dedicated to promoting sustainable growth and ensuring human
dignity for all. Liberia is prepared to work together with the United Nations,
other global allies, and the international community to accomplish the
Sustainable Development Goals and establish a fair, peaceful, and
sustainable world.

This commitment to unity is deeply ingrained in Liberia's history as a
founding member of the United Nations and other post-war international
institutions, as well as regional and sub-regional organizations. It also
affirms our strong belief in multilateralism and an international rules-based
world built on shared values and principles crucial to our future. This future
of a more peaceful, prosperous, and sustainable world must be all-
encompassing, fair, and dignified for everyone worldwide.

ONE UN, ONE WORLD

Thank You!

Page 6|6
