Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY H.E. MR. KHURELSUKH UKHNAA,
PRESIDENT OF MONGOLIA, AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 79TH
SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

(New York, 25 September 2024)

Mr. President,

Mr. Secretary-General,
Distinguished delegates,
Ladies and gentlemen,

At the outset, | wish to extend my heartfelt congratulations to Your Excellency Mr.
Philemon Yang, President of the 79th session of the United Nations General Assembly. |
wish you every success in your important work during this session.

Every time when | participate in the General Assembly, | find great pleasure in observing
the sculpture entitled “Consciousness”, created by a renowned Mongolian artist, and
located in the garden of the UN Headquarters.

This sculpture inspires deep contemplation, reminding us of our responsibilities,
awareness, and dignity in the context of humanity’s history and our obligations to future
generations.

This profoundly meaningful work symbolizes the historic moment when countries around
the world embraced the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change.

During my visit this year, the monument stood solemnly, as if urging us to reflect on the
goals and commitments we have made for future generations.

Unfortunately, as we approach the time to assess the implementation of these
documents, we recognize that our efforts and the progress we have achieved are
insufficient.

For instance, although we are halfway through the timeline for the UN 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, progress on nearly half of all SDG targets remains inadequate,
with 35 percent showing stagnation.

In response, UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres has initiated the Summit of the
Future to reassess our realities, revitalize our commitments, and amplify our collective
efforts.

At the Summit held just two days ago, we engaged in discussions on policies, objectives,
and avenues for cooperation concerning sustainable development, science, technology,
innovation, youth and governance transformation.

| am pleased to note that Mongolia actively participated in the negotiation processes for
the “Pact for the Future”, “Declaration on Future Generations” and the “Global
Digital Compact”, all of which were discussed and adopted at the Summit.
The countries of the world, including our own, must work diligently and cooperate to
implement these proposed actions.

| am pleased to see those heads of state, government, and their representatives have
wholeheartedly supported these commitments and actions, voicing their positions from
this esteemed podium.

Distinguished delegates,

Our lives are rapidly evolving in an interdependent way in this age of technological
progress and digital advancement.

However, tensions, armed conflicts and wars continue to escalate in many parts of the
world, fueled by geopolitical tensions stemming from prejudice, extreme ideologies,
mistrust, misunderstanding and disrespect.

Mongolia believes that strengthening multilateral cooperation based on international
law and the UN Charter is essential for ensuring international peace and security.
Dialogue, mutual understanding, and trust are the foundations for sustainable and
peaceful coexistence.

To sustain peace, combat climate change, protect public health, reduce economic
inequality, and establish justice, the international community must seek optimal solutions
and foster innovative cooperation that addresses the evolving dynamics of our era.

This year, Presidential and Parliamentary elections took place in over 60 countries, with
nearly half of the world’s population exercising their right to vote, making a year of
significant choices.

In Mongolia, Parliamentary elections were also held, and | would like to highlight that both
domestic and foreign observers, as well as international organizations, have commended
the elections for being successfully conducted within the legal framework.

Mongolia has always consistently sought to contribute to the international community’s
efforts for peace, security, and sustainable development.

In this regard, Mongolia has established diplomatic relations with all Member States of
the United Nations and is dedicated to strengthening and developing friendly relations
and cooperation with all countries around the globe.

As a nation that consistently pursues a peaceful, open, independent, and multi-pillar
foreign policy, Mongolia respects the pluralism inherent in the diverse histories, cultures,
civilizations, religions, national interests, and development paths of countries around the
world. We strive to develop international relations based on multi-pillar principles.

Therefore, my country upholds the principles of the UN Charter, particularly the
commitment to refrain from using force against the territorial integrity and political
independence of any state. In addressing disagreements and conflicts, we call upon
countries and nations around the world to prioritize diplomatic dialogue over
confrontation, promote unity over hostility, and pursue collective goals rather than
3

divisiveness in order to consistently cooperate in strengthening international peace and
security.

As Mongols, we have a rich history of valuing and seeking amicable solutions through
dialogue.

For centuries, the Great Mongol Empire engaged through political and diplomatic means,
in its relations with neighboring, distant, allied, and adversarial nations. This included
sending and receiving envoys and ambassadors, concluding agreements, fostering
friendships, and negotiating, which are the practices that remain as the cornerstone of
Mongolia's current foreign policy.

The “Gerege” serves as historical evidence of this legacy; it represents the origins of
credentials handed to envoys or modern diplomatic passports, having been used by
Mongols since the 13th century in their relations with other nations.

The “Gerege” is displayed as a historic artifact at the United Nations Headquarters. In
2000, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan remarked that the “Gerege” is an invaluable
heritage gifted by Mongols to the international community, emphasizing that we have a
lot to learn from the wisdom of Mongolian ancestors.

The principle of maintaining peace and harmonious coexistence championed by our
ancestors reflects the progressive ideals that underpin our current collective efforts to
sustain peace and stability.

At present, humanity is alarmed by the deepening global geopolitical tensions, which
ignite the fires of war and heighten the nuclear threat.

The collective efforts of countries around the world towards non-proliferation,
disarmament, and the total elimination of nuclear weapons, as well as the expansion of
nuclear-weapon-free zones, must not be overlooked.

Mongolia has made significant contributions to the elimination of nuclear threats, by
having its nuclear-weapon-free status recognized at the international level. We reaffirm
our commitment to continue pursuing and supporting nuclear-weapon-free policies and
initiatives.

Mongolia calls upon all countries to collaborate in ensuring peace and stability, particularly
in creating a world free from nuclear threats. We propose the convening of a special
gathering on this issue within the framework of the United Nations.

Mr. President,

Mongolia deeply appreciates the role of UN peacekeepers, the “blue helmets,” who
serve tirelessly and make significant contributions to international peace and security.

Due to various factors, such as international terrorism, brutal acts of extremism, and the
growing number of refugees, blue helmets are confronted with increasingly complex tasks
under more challenging conditions.
4

We must not forget that over 4,370 UN peacekeepers, including military, police, and
civilian personnel, have lost their lives in the line of duty.

Although Mongolia has a relatively small population, over the past 20 years, more than
20,000 peacekeepers have been deployed to hotspots around the world to contribute to
the peace and security of humanity.

In particular, in alignment with the Women, Peace and Security Agenda of the UN Security
Council, we aim to increase women’s participation in UN peacekeeping operations.
Currently, female officers made up 11 percent of our peacekeepers.

To ensure the competence of our peacekeepers, it is crucial to improve their psychological
well-being. Therefore, Mongolia initiated and developed a “Pilot Project for Supporting
Peacekeepers and their Families,” which was submitted to the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in December last year.

| am confident that this initiative will receive full support from the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other troop-contributing countries.

Mr. President, distinguished delegates,

In recent years, the rapid development of information and communication technologies
has significantly impacted the daily life of people and is seen as a factor that may
fundamentally reshape the development of civilization in the future.

In line with this, intensive discussions on information and communication technologies
and artificial intelligence have arisen in the international fora, and the recently adopted
“Global Digital Compact” is a timely and essential step.

Our country aims to keep pace with the development of information technology, placing
great importance on UN resolutions, documents, and other international legal frameworks
related to this issue, and keenly participating in their discussions.

In March of this year, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution calling on Member
States to ensure the reliability and security of artificial intelligence for the first time, which
is a significant step forward.

To accelerate the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, countries
around the world are focusing on policies that promote economic diversification, energy
and digital transitions, reduce the negative impacts of climate change, enhance adaptive
capacity, and increase access to essential social services, particularly in education and
health, while also prioritizing employment and food security.

On the other hand, global debt accumulation has reached unprecedented levels, with
debt service payments in developing countries exceeding the amounts borrowed, further
constraining the budgetary space needed to implement Sustainable Development Goals.

Mongolia fully supports the international community's efforts to not only ensure debt
sustainability but also fundamentally reform the international financial architecture under
the initiatives outlined in the UN Secretary-General's report, “Our Common Agenda.”
Distinguished delegates,

In the early years of the 21st century, ideological conflicts that divided the world became
history, while traditional military threats receded and non-traditional threats such as
climate change, pandemics, terrorism, cybercrime, and refugees gained increasing
attention.

However, this situation has changed drastically in recent years, with traditional threats
resurfacing and negatively impacting international security and sustainable development.

In other words, the overlap and expanding scope of both traditional and non-traditional
threats require countries around the world to pay special attention and strengthen their
collaborative efforts.

In particular, global warming and climate change have transcended natural and
economic boundaries, exacerbating sensitive social issues and disputes over resources,
and triggering migration that bring numerous direct and indirect dangers and risks.

If this situation continues, humanity will face not just a choice between development or
stagnation, but rather a choice between existence and non-existence.

Therefore, we must carefully assess the situation and recognize the need for smart
solutions based on the advancements of our era, as well as the implementation of new
technologies, and share good practices while collaborating to overcome the challenges
posed by climate change.

As descendants of nomads, we, Mongols, have preserved and honored our unique
cultural heritage and traditions to this day.

The origin of our nomadic civilization is, in fact, the philosophy of green development,
which emphasizes caring for and protecting nature while responsibly utilizing its benefits.

This indicates that we have substantial traditional wisdom and initiatives regarding the
future of green development.

Thus, in line with the goals of sustainable development as well as “Vision 2050” long term
development policy, Mongolia has successfully been implementing national movements
and programs such as, “Billion Trees,” “Food Security and Safety”, “Healthy Mongolia,”
and “Digital Mongolia.”

These initiatives represent our contributions at both international and regional levels in
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.

| am also pleased to announce that Mongolia is actively working to implement the
resolution adopted by the UN General Assembly declaring 2026 as the International
Year of Rangelands and Pastoralists. Furthermore, we are also preparing to host the
17th Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Ulaanbaatar in 2026.

| am confident that the international community and Member States will support and
collaborate with us in these efforts.
Mr. President,

Mongolia as a landlocked country, with its unique location on the Central Asian plateau,
and extreme weather conditions, has consistently paid particular attention to the issues
of countries in similar special situations. We have actively collaborated with them to
safeguard our interests and make a tangible contribution to amplify our voices on the
global stage.

Mongolia and Austria co-chaired the Preparatory Committee for the Third United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDCs) for 2023-2024 and
successfully facilitated discussions on the draft outcome document among Member
States.

We are pleased that the draft of the Action Program to be adopted at the upcoming
conference in Botswana next December includes innovative content outlining specific
goals and measures to guide the development of LLDCs over the next decade.

Therefore, we urge all LLDCs, transit countries, and all UN Member States and
development partners to engage at a highest level in the Third UN Conference on LLDCs
and to contribute creatively to discussions for the successful implementation of the
Program of Action.

Mr. President,

At the Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing in 1995, it was proclaimed that
“women’s rights are human rights, and human rights are women’s rights,” setting forth the
significant goal of eliminating barriers to gender equality on the global stage.

We, Mongols, have a long-standing culture and tradition of honoring and respecting
women, with a history of Mongolian Queens and women who played crucial roles in
governance and social affairs throughout our nations’ history.

This rich tradition and cultural heritage have continued to evolve, positioning Mongolia as
one of the leaders in promoting gender equality in Asia.

In its first Constitution, Mongolia became the first country in Asia to guarantee equal rights
for women, including the rights to vote and to be elected. This year, we celebrate the
centennial anniversary of the establishment of the national organization for women — the
Mongolian Women’s Federation.

As we approach this historic anniversary, in 2023, we have implemented legal and policy
reforms designed to enhance women's participation at both social and political decision-
making levels.

As a result, in the recent parliamentary elections, 25.4% of all elected members were
women, exceeding the average rate of 21.2% in Asia.

Moreover, in August of this year, our country successfully hosted the World Women’s
Forum under the theme “Towards a Green Future” in Ulaanbaatar in collaboration with
the United Nations.
7

This forum brought together women leaders from governments, international
organizations, and influential representatives from diverse sectors — social, economic,
and cultural — across five continents. They proposed numerous creative initiatives to
enhance women’s roles and contributions toward achieving Sustainable Development
Goals, including economics, environment, climate change, food security, education,
sports, culture, and the arts. | am pleased to highlight that the “Ulaanbaatar Declaration:
Towards a Sustainable Future” was adopted as the forum’s outcome document.

Building on the momentum of the World Women’s Forum, Mongolia will continue to
actively promote gender equality and the empowerment of women.

Mr. President, distinguished delegates,

The General Assembly of the United Nations is the most important and honorable podium
for amplifying the voice of ideas and aspirations for international peace and security, well-
being and development of humanity.

Mongolia has consistently supported the efforts of Member States to reform the UN
Security Council into a more equitable, accessible, transparent, effective, democratic and
responsible system.

We also strongly advocate for further strengthening the United Nations’ central role and
coordination in global affairs.

Our country believes that any international challenges and misunderstandings should be
addressed through mutual understanding, trust, respect, and dialogue, and resolved
within the framework of international legal norms.

Therefore, | call on you, Heads of states, governments and distinguished delegates, to
demonstrate exceptional leadership and make meaningful contributions to strengthen
trust, mutual respect and cooperation among the nations of the world in the crucial pursuit
of global peace, security, sustainable development and the well-being of humanity.

May the Eternal Blue Sky bless us with peace throughout the world.

Thank you for your attention!

-- 000 --
