Statement made by His Excellency Robert Abela
Prime Minister of the Republic of Malta

At the General Debate of the 79" Session of the General Assembly

United Nations, New York, 27/09/2024

When we gathered this time last year, little could we have predicted that — just a couple of
weeks later our world would be plunged into even greater turmoil by the despicable attacks
of October 7*".

In the twelve months since, we have seen continued loss of life and a humanitarian
emergency on such a scale that it is all too easy to give up hope. All too easy to believe that
nothing can be done. All too easy to turn the other cheek.

We cannot escape from the stark reality that our world faces the gravest of challenges, and
the populations of far too many of these United Nations face the gravest perils. The gravity
of those threats is such that we — as leaders from across the globe — are confronted with a
choice of two paths. We can choose the path of despair — dejectedly deciding that is simply
impossible to make a difference or we can choose the path of persistence.

Determined that, no matter how rough the waters, we can, and we must redouble our
efforts to meet those challenges and mitigate those perils. | emphatically believe that we
have a moral responsibility to take the path of persistence.

| will never apologize for reaffirming the simple belief that motivated me to come into
public life, that tomorrow can be better than today. And no matter what the headwinds, it is
a belief that still motivates all | do. | refuse to believe that we should just give up. | refuse to
listen to those siren whispers that the worst is inevitable, and it is not worth working for
better outcomes. | refuse to give into the notion that we can defer difficult decisions, or that
small countries just have to passively accept the actions of larger players.

To acquiesce to that negativity would be to accept that this General Assembly, that this
United Nations is nothing more than a counsel of despair. To that | say a resounding no.
This United Nations can and must be a counsel of hope. Nobody is going to pretend that we
can wave any sort of magic wand or deliver instant solutions. But we have a duty to keep
hope alive, to keep trying, to keep working. To keep battling for the values that were the very
foundation of the idea of a United Nations.
Eight decades ago — from the rubble of the first truly global conflict - our forerunners had
the courage and the foresight to see that the world had to have a forum where the voice of
every nation could be heard. And as colonialism rightly crumbled, there were to be a lot of
newly independent nations to add their signatures to the Charter. Malta is one such nation.
As we gained our independence from the United Kingdom, we took our place in the world.
This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of Malta’s accession to the United Nations. Over
those six decades, my country has developed beyond the wildest dreams of the pioneers
who saw us to statehood.

So, as we mark 60 years of Malta as a proud member of the United Nations, and as the UN
itself gets ready to mark its 80th anniversary, my message is clear. The world needs the
United Nations now more than ever. Malta values the United Nations now more than ever.
And make no mistake - Malta may be a small country, but we will always be a loud voice
against deferring difficult decisions and avoiding difficult conversations. We will never
resign ourselves to a future devoid of peace. We will never abandon our commitment to
supporting peace processes — no matter how tough those processes may be.

We will remain steadfast in our support for steps to build and maintain peace in every
region of conflict. We will remain as committed to - and confident in —- this United Nations
as that day in December sixty years ago when the ink dried on Malta’s signature.

Malta has a unique political and geographical position. At the heart of the Mediterranean, a
bridge between Europe and North Africa, and the crossroads of Europe and the Middle
East. A full member of the EU, but with neutrality enshrined in our constitution. We are
acutely aware of the responsibility this position brings. Two words sum-up the role | believe
Malta can and does play. Honest broker. From hosting peace talks, to brokering difficult
dialogues, we aim to harness our position to bring those in conflict together to at least try
and find a way forward.

This is exactly the approach Malta has brought to our membership of the Security Council
over the past two years. And that is exactly the approach we have brought to the Chair of
the OSCE which we assumed in January. Malta was happy to step-up and take the Chair as
an honest broker — allowing all members to endorse our leadership, and ensuring the work
of this vital body can continue. Like Malta, the OSCE is a bridge between neighbours across
continents.

Europe can only be secure, and at peace, if its neighbours are secure and at peace. Which

is why — both in the Security Council and in the OSCE - our guiding watchwords are always
promoting Sustainability, Peace and Security. This approach sits well alongside the OSCE’s
comprehensive conception of security as not just about ending military conflict, but also
addressing the social and economic tensions that create and exacerbate international
tensions. To that end we will continue to press for all nations to comply with the Arms Trade
Treaty. The failure of too many countries to comply with international rules poses too great
a threat to too many innocent citizens.

President, as I’ve reflected on my country’s six decades of membership of this United
Nations —- I’ve looked back at the wisdom of some of those who have held the office of
Secretary General. Sadly, these words of Ban Ki Moon remain as true and urgent today as
ever: “The world is over-armed, and peace is under-funded.”

The peace and humanitarian budgets — which are at the heart of the UN’s mission — remain
severely underfunded, harshly impacting too many of the world’s most vulnerable people.
Which is why Malta urges all member states to play their part by remitting the resources to
ensure the hard-working, hard-pressed frontline UN staff can play their part in bringing
relief and hope where it is so desperately needed.

As Malta concludes its current term on the Security Council, | am proud of what we have
been able to help achieve. Amidst the tragedy of events in Israel and Gaza we have worked
with others to prioritize the relief of humanitarian suffering.

We used our seat on the Security Council to work for Resolution 2712, which demanded
urgent and extended humanitarian pauses and the provision of corridors through Gaza to
supply critical supplies needed by so many civilians, not least children. The resolution also
called for the release of hostages held captive by Hamas and other militant groups in Gaza.
We are proud that this led to the release of 105 hostages during the negotiated seven-day
pause. Similarly, | am pleased Malta played a key role in the Security Council adopting
Resolution 2728 —- which demanded an immediate ceasefire in Gaza for the month of
Ramadan, alongside the immediate release of all hostages. This was the first joint motion
from the non-permanent members on a geographic situation in the Security Council’s
history.

Understandably, much of the world’s attention has been on Israel/Gaza since October 7",
which has now expanded to a dangerous and deeply worrying escalation in Lebanon. We
stand firm in our belief that we must all strive to ensure that the flames of this conflict do
not engulf the whole region, and that we all take decisive steps to resolve this conflict
before it is too late.

Furthermore, it is imperative that we, as a global community, do not lose focus on those
other parts of the world where war and the killing of civilians is also all too present, and all
too tragic, a daily reality. Sudan, Yemen, Syria and, of course, Ukraine.
So, let me turn to another country in conflict. Malta’s southern neighbour — Libya. Helping
the Libyan people achieve a genuine and lasting resolution to the institutional crisis — for
which they have paid too high a price for too long -—is a key priority for Malta. For sucha
resolution would not only benefit the Libyan people, but it would also benefit all Libya’s
neighbours and the wider region. Only with a single functioning government — supported by
citizens across the whole country - can Libya play its full part in addressing the migrant
crisis which puts so many lives at risk.

Which is why Malta warmly welcomes the initiatives taken by UNS-MIL in bringing the
parties together to sign an agreement that will hopefully end a crisis at the Central Bank of
Libya; and also to kickstart the stalled wider political process. Malta will continue to stand
ready to do anything it can to aid that process, and we will be unstinting in advocating for
proactive engagement by the international community to support and enhance these UN
led efforts. Together we have a duty to aid the mediation needed to create a pathway
towards national parliamentary and presidential elections in Libya.

As friends and neighbours of Libya, we can and must help. But for the process to truly
succeed, it must be Libyan led and Libyan owned. To which end, we unequivocally call for
the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces, fighters and mercenaries from Libya. And
Malta re-emphasises the need for a full impletion of the Libyan arms embargo in line with
all the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Equality is a key value for my government and my country. Just as the situation in Libya will
only be resolved by all the people of the country knowing they have an equal voice, so are
so many of the conflicts, disputes and tensions around the world fuelled by inequality.
Equality isn’t some sort of added extra — nice to have but not vital to tackling the world’s
problems. That view couldn’t be more misguided. Equality - across gender, race, religion,
age, disability, sexuality —is not just imperative for its own sake. Equality is also imperative
in finding lasting solutions to so many of the challenges that face us all.

So, |am honoured Malta stands at the forefront of promoting civil liberties globally. We are
one of the few countries that has already implemented an Anti-Racism Strategy, and now
we are in the process of drafting a second, renewed Anti-Racism Strategy. We will never
take equality at home for granted, and we will always advocate and support greater equality
internationally. All too often, it is women and girls who bear the brunt of conflict, and all too
infrequently are the voices of women and girls heard when it comes to solving those
conflicts. Without women, there can be no peace. As the world redoubles its efforts to
bring peace, so must we all redouble our efforts to ensure the voice of women and girls is
heard, at the top tables, as well as on the ground.
During our term on the Security Council, Malta has worked hard to do just that. Malta has
chaired the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. In the last
eighteen months, the Working Group has issued conclusions on the role of children in the
conflicts in South Sudan, Nigeria, Mali, Afghanistan, CAR, Colombia, Iraq and Somalia.
That list is a sad testament to the magnitude and gravity of the repeated violations against
children in crisis zones. We must never let up in our outrage and action at these persistent
and flagrant abuses of the rights of the child —- as enshrined by this United Nations.

President, we have a saying in Maltese: Il-bahar sinjur. The sea is wealthy. And indeed it is.
As an island nation, for Malta, the wealth of the sea equates to the wealth of our people.
The health of the sea equates to the health of our people. So we need no reminder just how
essential it is to protect the wealth, health and bio-diversity of the earth’s seas and oceans.
And we know just how much small island nations like ours will be impacted as climate
change warms oceans and raises sea levels. We, small island nations, are amongst the
lowest emitters of greenhouse gases, but we are literally the frontline of the climate
emergency.

The impact of climate change will be felt by all our citizens. It is our duty to them to do all
we can to minimise that change and maximise our resilience to the changes already being
felt. Delay and prevarication simply aren’t options. Climate change must remain at the top
of the global agenda. Solidarity — standing shoulder to shoulder — with our fellow small
island nations is a key value for Malta.

Solidarity means actions, not just words. The ‘Islands for Islands’ initiative is central to our
foreign policy — providing concrete, practical assistance to Small Island Developing States.
Sharing best practice and building capacity. That’s why Malta has jointly taken the lead in
developing the ‘Climate Vulnerability and Resilience Index’ — a practical resource to help
smallislands identify and prepare for the effects of the changing climate. As sea levels
become an ever greater concern so does the health of our seas and oceans become ever
greater a priority. Malta remains, and will always remain, at the forefront of efforts to
protect our oceans.

In the very first years of our UN membership, we were one of the foremost proponents of
the principle of the Common Heritage of Mankind — thank you Arvid Pardo — and it remains
our lodestar. We have consistently spoken up in the Security Council about the existential
threat from rising sea levels. And Malta will always remain unwavering in our support for the
UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.

Malta welcomes the first ratifications of the Biodiversity Beyond National Jurisdiction
Agreement - which will provide much needed, much greater protection for the two-thirds of
global oceans that lie beyond national jurisdictions. The treaty will only come into force
when sixty nations have ratified it. Our oceans need it. Our peoples deserve it. So | say to
my fellow leaders - speed up and sign!

To preserve healthy maritime environments we all need to take practical, innovative steps.
That’s why | am delighted at the success Malta’s new ‘Shore to Ship’ initiative is having. The
stunning Grand Harbour in our capital Valetta is a magnet for cruise ships. But while
docked in berth, they can produce serious amounts of pollution if relying on their engines in
the confined space. So ‘shore to ship’ is installing onshore power supply alongside the
quays used by cruise ships. Meaning they can switch off their engines and help reduce
pollution in this most special of places by around ninety percent.

In Malta we know that while the sea can yield great gifts, it can also be the host for illicit
activity and the breaking of international laws. The high seas must never become the ‘Wild
West’. The rule of law and the will of the international community must always hold on sea
as on land. Which is why Malta championed the creation of a unified database of all
vessels involved in illicit activity - shareable and usable by all participating states.

Shipping is central to international trade, so ensuring they are fully applied at sea is central
to any successful sanctions regime. And that can only happen if ship owners know that
trying to break sanctions brings consequences. But it is essential - for reasons of natural
justice and to ensure buy in from member states — that the listing of those breaking
sanctions is fair and transparent. So Malta was proud to jointly hold the pen — alongside the
United States — for resolution 2744, that overhauls the delisting process for the first time in
almost two decades. By creating a better system for delisting where warranted, we can
ward against premature lifting of sanctions which is not warranted.

President, we have witnessed how effective global health policies can unite nations,
especially when addressing crises that transcend borders and that affect us all. Just
yesterday, UN Member States adopted the Political Declaration on Antimicrobial
Resistance, which has been diligently facilitated by Malta and Barbados over many
months. AMR presents a collective threat that demands our urgent attention. We know
what must be done to prevent the loss of millions of lives and to avert trillions of dollars in
additional healthcare costs. This Declaration should serve as a strategic roadmap for
policymakers, guiding their efforts to tackle AMR in the years ahead.

President, when we reconvene in a years’ time we will be marking the eightieth birthday of
our United Nations. But we mustn’t ever be just marking time. We need to always be
marking progress.
As Dag Hammarskjold said: “The pursuit of peace and progress cannot end in a few years
in either victory or defeat. The pursuit of peace and progress, with its trials and its errors, its
successes and its setbacks, can never be relaxed and never abandoned.”

In Europe the average life expectancy is just over eighty years. The UN will only have life
expectancy longer than that, if we all recommit to its future. As the saying goes, | want
reports of its death to be greatly exaggerated. Yes, we can’t ignore the fact that the
architecture of the world’s collective security is under stress like never before. Voices of
nationalism dismiss the need to work together. Instigators of conflict believe they can
escape the wrath and the writ of the global community. Both couldn’t be more wrong.
Acting to end conflict and relieve suffering is never easy. But that doesn’t mean we should
stop trying.

Reaching consensus across borders and across political differences is never easy. But that
doesn’t mean we should stop trying. Acknowledging we have all contributed to the state
our world is in and setting aside pride to try and make the world a better place is never
easy. But that doesn’t mean we should stop trying. Arguably the temptation to ‘wring hands’
and see change as too hard to achieve is greatest for small nations like my own. To sit back
and sigh that the big boys have made too much of a mess of things.

Well, Malta will never sit back. Malta will never wring hands. Malta will never leave it to
others. Yes, Malta will always be realistic. But Malta will always be committed to
multilateralism. When the perils are at their greatest - the need to work together is at its
greatest.

So, let us use the next twelve months - in the run up to that eightieth anniversary, to
reassert our collective belief in this United Nations, to redouble our efforts. To resolve
conflict, to take the steps the future of the earth needs and to deliver the change the
peoples of this planet need and deserve.

To raise our game in supporting the Secretary General in delivering the institutional reform
the UN needs to better fulfil its purpose. In short - and with every fibre of my being | say to
my fellow leaders: Now is the time to choose, and we must choose the Path of Persistence.
We must reject the path of despair.

Yes, our world faces huge challenges and huge threats. But if we lose belief in the power of
collective action, if we lose belief in the ability to work together to make a difference, then
we are losing belief in the very idea of a better world.

If we fail to persist — we fail to lead. If we fail to perceiver - we fail the people who put their
faith in us. Failure simply isn’t an option. The stakes are too high. The risks too great. The
consequences too severe. So let us make that choice. Let us today recommit as a United
Nations. Let us affirm the Path of Persistence.

And — no matter how tough the going — let us enter the 80th year of this United Nations with
the simple goal in our head and in our hearts. Let us - now more than ever — never give up
believing that tomorrow can -and must - be better than today.

Thank you.

Source: PR241546 - PM (gov.mt)

