REPUBLIC OF MALAWI

NATIONAL STATEMENT

BY
HIS EXCELLENCY
DR LAZARUS MCCARTHY CHAKWERA
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF MALAWI

DURING THE HIGH-LEVEL DEBATE
OF THE 79™ UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

NEW YORK, USA

267™ SEPTEMBER 2024
e Your Excellency Philémon Yang President of the 79th

Session of the United Nations General Assembly;

e Your Excellency Anténio Guterres, Secretary General of

the United Nations;

e Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government and

Leaders of Delegations;

e Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen.

Every member state of these United Nations relates to other
nations in the world on three dimensions: cooperation,
competition, and conflict. And how we manage our
relationships on each of these dimensions will ultimately
determine the kind of world we will create for the children of
tomorrow. So when we sit in this chamber to deliberate on the
cooperation, or competition, or conflict between member

states, we are actually designing and deciding our future.

I am therefore glad that the theme of our debate this year
touches on all three dimensions, because the bottom line is
that in all three, we can and must do better. This year’s theme
calls on us to act together to advance peace, sustainable
development, and dignity. This is a call to stronger
multilateral cooperation. But if we are serious about
cooperation, then we must act with urgency in fixing and
reforming the United Nations and other multilateral

institutions, and one fix that we from African demand is for
the United Nations to embrace democracy in the Security
Council by giving Africa two permanent seats with veto power.
When I first made this call in my inaugural address in this
chamber, I was delighted to hear President Biden also
announce that the United States is in favour of this reform.
Similarly, when I met President Xi Jinping of China three
weeks ago, I was delighted to hear that he too is in favor of
stronger representation of the interests of developing
countries in the Security Council. So, Mr. President, the time

to fix this is now.

We need this fix to strengthen our voice on the issues that
matter to us in Africa. In the four years that I have been
President, I have declared a state of natural disaster every year
because of climate change impacts that we cannot solve
without multilateral cooperation. And for one of those years,
I was chair of two development communities, namely the
Southern Africa Development Community and the Least
Developed Countries, and I learnt firsthand that no nation can
survive a global crisis or develop in the face of shocks without

strong multilateral cooperation to sustain it.

Even this year, I see how challenging it has been for my
country and for Malawians. Coming off the back of the state
of natural disaster that I declared last year to secure
international cooperation in response to the devastation

caused by Cyclone Freddy, I have had to declare another state
of natural disaster this year to secure international
cooperation in response to the El Nino weather conditions
that have destroyed crops in three quarters of the country’s
districts, leaving a fifth of the Malawian population without
enough food to last the year. And this is happening in the face
of the devastating trauma we have suffered as a nation for the
past three months from the tragic death of our Vice President,
Right Honourable Dr. Saulos Claus Chilima, in a plane crash
whose cause is yet to be established by the German experts we
have asked to investigate the accident, yet another example
of the necessity of international cooperation. Even the great
strides of development we have made over the past four years
have been facilitated by strong international cooperation.
Whether it be the four road corridors and hundreds of
secondary schools we are constructing through our
cooperation with the United States; or the M1 road we are
rehabilitating and expanding through our cooperation with the
European Union; or the railway system we have revived for the
first time in 40 years through our cooperation with China; or
the orthopedic and neurosurgery hospital we have developed
through our cooperation with Norway; or the Makanjira road
we are ready to develop through our cooperation with Saudi
Arabia; or the investments we are making to strengthen
education and governance institutions through our
cooperation with the United Kingdom; or the solar power
plants we have developed through our cooperation with Japan;
or the Extended Credit Facility from the International

Monetary Fund that has unlocked our access to the World
Bank’s budgetary and IDA support through our cooperation
with development partners; or the life-saving food assistance
we mobilized for the people of Mangochi following the impact
of Tropical Storm Ana through our cooperation with Iceland;
or our implementation of social protection programs to help
rural women enjoy economic empowerment through our
cooperation with Ireland; or the procurement of emergency
food, fertilizers, and climate resilient seeds for climate-
ravaged Malawian communities through our cooperation with
Tanzania, Ukraine, Egypt, Iceland, Russia, Morocco, and many
others, Malawi is a testament to the power of cooperation to
move a nation’s development forward into an inclusively
wealthy and sustainable future that is brighter than the past.
It is in fact this foundation of international cooperation that
we have built on to actively engage in intergovernmental
negotiations on the Pact for the Future that we are fully
endorsing at this 79th Session of the General Assembly. It is
also this foundation of international cooperation that we have
built on to host 80 international organizations and
institutions for our second annual Malawi Partners Conference
here in New York to get investor alignment for our ATM
Strategy of boosting productivity and value addition in the
sectors of Agriculture, Tourism, and Mining that hold the

greatest promise for Malawi’s economic transformation.

If the future belongs to nations that know how to leverage the

power of international cooperation, then the future belongs to
Malawi. If the future belongs to nations with an unapologetic
commitment to multilateral collaboration, then the future
belongs to Malawi. If the future belongs to nations that are
driven by the moral conviction to uphold the values of
servant-leadership, shared prosperity, ending corruption, and
the rule of law, then the future belongs to Malawi. If the future
belongs to nations that have adopted a no-retreat and no-
surrender attitude towards the achievement of SDGs by 2030,
then the future belongs to Malawi. If the future belongs to
nations that put its children first, the way that Malawi has
done by resolving to end child marriage and the poisoning of

children with lead products by 2030.

But, Mr. President, our efforts to move forward in fifth gear
are being significantly slowed down by a global system of
multilateral agencies and financial institutions that are too
slow, too inefficient, too monolithic, and too undemocratic for
the kind of speedy and tailor made interventions we need. As
a result of our refusal to practice the democracy of equal
representation here in the UN, our calls for member states to
practice democracy in their own jurisdictions are beginning to
fall on deaf ears. As a result of our refusal to honour climate
financing pledges or link them to debt relief, the debt-to-GDP
ratios in developing countries like Malawi are growing at an
alarming rate, posing a significant threat to global financial
stability. If this is not fixed, those who keep us in a state of

perpetual debt when they have the resources to cancel those
debts should make no mistake: the spreading debt crisis in the
developing world is a cancer that will make your own

economies unsafe. So the time to fix this is now.

Mr. President,

I said that the second dimension of international relations is
competition, and again in this area we all can and must do
better. There is nothing wrong with healthy competition
between nations, because competition fuels innovation,
improves quality, and multiplies options for citizens, which is
the essence of freedom. But as we have done in global sports,
we must make competition between nations fair by regularly
reviewing and revising the rules on which our international
system is based, to ensure that the way nations compete and
what they compete for is not rigged to disenfranchise some
countries as we compete for natural resources, international
markets, financial support, and new technologies, which are

currently skewed against the Global South.

Even with the era of Artificial Intelligence being fully upon us,
I worry that the rules for regulating this arena are already
being written to empower some nations and give them unfair
advantages over others. We need more than a rules-based
system. We also need the rules themselves to foster fair
competition. Of course, what this means is that we need
stronger governance institutions that can enforce fair rules for

accessing education, markets, technology, financing, and
natural resources. It is therefore my central contention, Mr.
President, that the one place we must have strong governance
is here. If governance is weak here, there will be no one to
regulate the collaboration and competition between nations in
an equitable manner, and it is this absence of equity that is at
the root of unwinnable conflict in Eastern Europe, in
Palestine, in Eastern DRC, and counting. So we need
governance reform to make the United Nations stronger,
because the world needs a strong UN that can be good and
peaceful, not a weak UN that can only be harmless, and we

need it now.

Thank you for your attention.
