FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

STATEMENT BY
HIS EXCELLENCY MOHAMAD HASAN
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, MALAYSIA

79'" SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

GENERAL DEBATE

“LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND: ACTING
TOGETHER FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF
PEACE, SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
AND HUMAN DIGNITY FOR PRESENT AND
FUTURE GENERATIONS”

NEW YORK, 28 SEPTEMBER 2024
FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Excellency President Mr. Philemon Yang, thank you
for this opportunity to address the 79th session, of

the General Assembly.

Representing Malaysia, | stand before you today, Mr.
President, reiterating our commitment to peace, in
line with the values enshrined, in our esteemed
Charter.

(3-second pause)

79 years it has been, since the founding of the United
Nations.

From the dust of the Second World War, we
emerged, many of us as new nation-states, with a

shared goal to build a safer world.

Yet, for many of us, it is NOT a safer world, than it
was 79 years ago. For many, it has only become, a
DEADLIER world.
10.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

It has become a world, in which war can be waged
remotely, and with impunity. A world in which a drone
strike, can fatally interrupt a lesson in a school, a
surgery in a hospital, or a convoy delivering

humanitarian aid.

We have LAWS against these practices, yet our calls
for peace, are REPEATEDLY ignored, and vetoed

away.

In other words, it is a world in which the mighty,
continue to silence the meek, with far greater

weapons than before.

Nowhere does this ring truer, of course, than in
Gaza.

We stand, at a CRITICAL juncture in world history,
on the failure of global governance to address, the
genocide of Palestinians.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

And ithas echoed (EH-code) across the world, on the
abysmal response by world leaders, to end these

horrendous crimes.

Yet, there are also many of us who have pursued
justice for the people of Gaza. For almost one year
now, we have raised our voices in protest, and

sought to establish a ceasefire.

Again and again, our voices have been shot down in
the Security Council, through the power of veto.

It is clear: the mechanisms of the Security Council
have been ABUSED, to enable mass atrocities.

Our failure to establish a ceasefire is no longer

justifiable. We have run OUT of excuses.

It is time to address the problem. The veto should not
be exercised at will. There MUST be exceptions, in
cases of crimes against humanity, and attacks on

civilian infrastructure.
20.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

We MUST commit ourselves, towards a reformed
United Nations. Justice begins with ending impunity,
and ensuring accountability.

For this to be realised, the undemocratic veto MUST
be limited, or abolished altogether.

The HUMILIATING paralysis of the Security Council,
must be corrected, through the empowerment of this
General Assembly, where the voices of the majority

prevail.

Understand this: Our willingness to reform is a
matter, of life and death, for countless innocent
people. There are children DYING, between missile
strikes, and between the words that we speak today.
21.

22.

23.

24.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Mr. President,

The theme of this General Assembly session, is
“Leaving No One Behind”. In the spirit of this effort, it
fills us with HOPE, to see the State of Palestine
seated among us today.

Malaysia lauds the 143 Member States, for their
support in extending the UN’s principle, of equality
among nations, to the State of Palestine this year.
And we strongly urge, for the remaining minority to

join the majority.

It is time to realise Palestine’s right to Statehood, and

full membership in this Assembly.

It is only through the elevation of dialogue and
diplomacy, that we can seek a long-lasting solution.
NOT through collective punishment, NOT through
man-made famine, and NOT through impunity and
disregard for international law.
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Indeed, the elevation of dialogue, and respect for
international law, has been compromised in this

Assembly for some time now.

Israel has violated EVERY international law there is,
including the Genocide Convention, Geneva
Conventions, and core Human Rights Treaties.

Just months ago, the world witnessed Israel's
mockery, and utter disrespect of the United Nations
in this very hall, with the insolent shredding of the UN
Charter.

Israel’s actions, with each passing day, raise our
doubts as to whether it actually believes in the UN
system, or values its membership in_ this

organisation.

Its illegal occupation has entrenched a system of

aPARtheid, and discrimination against Palestinians.
30.

31.

32.

33.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

The Israeli regime has itself declared its intent to
wipe out an entire population. This is, without
question, a GENOCIDE.

The United Nations must not remain idle. We must
urgently utilise, the existing processes founded by
this General Assembly, along with mechanisms

developed by the Human Rights Council.

Malaysia calls on the international community to
reinstitute the United Nations Special Committee
Against APARtheid.

Furthermore, Malaysia demands that the Security
Council, invoke the powers under Chapter 7 of the
UN Charter, and impose an immediate arms

embargo against Israel.
34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Therefore, our task is threefold.
a) One: we must limit, or abolish, the veto.

b) Two: we must continue to empower, the voices
of the oppressed within this General Assembly.

c) And three: we must HALT the flow of weapons,
to rogue (“rog’) states who have proven, a
hundred times over, their willingness to commit
crimes against humanity.

Although the powerful few may behave as though
might is right, let there be no question that in the
United Nations, the voice of the majority will NOT go

ignored.

Indeed, we must empower smaller countries, to meet

the challenges of our time.

The international landscape is in flux, Mr. President.

Superpower __ rivalries .... Global economic
uncertainties ... Climate change ... Unequal
development, and the many misfortunes that come
with it.
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Countries situated in Southeast Asia, are not exempt

from these worries.

Yet through the decades (DEH-cades), we have not
only endured, but overcome, many of our shared
hurdles together. We have achieved this together,
the ASEAN way.

Through ASEAN, we have propelled ourselves
forward, within the international architecture, by
bolstering peace, security, economy, and regional
identity.

Yet, the years ahead will profoundly test us. ASEAN
resilience, ASEAN shared norms and identity, and

ASEAN processes and mechanisms.

Malaysia stands ready to assume, the Chairmanship
of ASEAN in 2025. And we are fully cognizant (COG-
ni-zant) of reasserting ASEAN, in the driver’s seat of

the Asia Pacific region.
44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Our Chairmanship will focus, on the region’s drive for
future-readiness. We will emphasise: reinforcement
of global aspirations; inclusive and people-driven

policies; and future-oriented mechanisms.

We will aim to fortify ASEAN centrality, amid the
emergence of multilateral pacts affecting the region.
This is a key step, to prevent the region from
becoming entrapped, in unnecessary geopolitical
rivalry, or possible escalation.

ASEAN centrality must also involve managing, the
most critical issue of the South China Sea.

This body of water, rich in resources and carrying
vital shipping lanes, has become a flashpoint of rising
geopolitical tensions.

Escalation of rhetoric (RET-a-rik) is a dangerous
path to follow. We must not allow the situation to
become dominated by growing distrust. This benefits
no one. It only further undermines security, and

destabilises global trade.
49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

We must collectively pursue a different vision of the
South China Sea: a future in which this region is a

zone of peace, stability, and cooperation.

We must adopt a collaborative approach, embedded

in diplomacy and dialogue.

Thus, | call upon all countries to abide by the
UNCLOS in the conduct of maritime governance. We

MUST prioritise peaceful coexistence.

This is also one of the many reasons, that the
Member States will continue to work together, with
regards to Myanmar. We will push for stronger
humanitarian assistance, and adherence to the
ASEAN Five-Point Consensus, to seek solutions.

We will do it as one. The diversity of our region, far
from being an obstacle, is symbolic of our power to
build bridges.
54.

55.

56.

57.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

It goes without saying, Mr. President, that our
stewardship of ASEAN will therefore emphasise,
continuous dialogue with our partners, as well as the
adaptability needed, to engage with different

challenges and stakeholders.

Malaysia will strive to realise our common desire,
and collective will, to live in a region of lasting peace,
security and stability; sustained economic growth;

social progress ... and ultimately, shared prosperity.

“Shared prosperity”. This is the ghost of geopolitics —

often spoken about, but never seen.

Mr. President,

The countries of the Global South have continued to
be marginalised, and remain under-represented on
many fronts: ... global socioeconomic development
... Climate mitigation efforts ... education ... health ...

and infrastructure development.
58.

59.

60.

61.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

International mechanisms fail to adapt to current
realities, often isolating and penalising developing
countries, placing the burden of environmental guilt

onto them, while disregarding our very real needs.

The lack of infrastructure, technology, and
resources, has prevented developing countries from
fully engaging in_ international systems and

aspirations.

One of the primary challenges, is equitable access to

financing for development.

Innovative and new models of financing for
development, that drive sustainability, conservation,
climate action, and achievement of SDGs, should be

part of new multilateral solutions.
62.

63.

64.

65.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

The climate crisis may be the most pressing
challenge of our time. It is no longer a distant threat,
it has FLOODED our doorsteps. It transcends
borders by disrupting economies, and displacing

entire communities.

The scientific data has spoken. We are witnessing
unprecedented levels of warming, extreme weather,

and devastating impacts of rising sea levels.

National efforts alone will not suffice (suff-ICE). The
Climate crisis requires global solutions, in the form of
climate financing, technology transfer, and capacity

building.

We must continue to push for a just and equitable
approach, in meeting the development needs of the
Global South.
66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

At the same time, Malaysia advocates the

importance of Global South Unity.

We have a broader vision of promoting peace,
development, and a stable multipolar order, through

the empowerment of the voices of the south.

The countries of the Global South hold massive
potential, to further the pursuit of peace and justice
around the world. Through solidarity among
developing nations, and through mutual support and
understanding.

This is fundamental, to ensure fair and equitable
progress for all. The Global South demands your
attention. We must not leave anyone behind.

Unfortunately, global trends are pointing in the

opposite direction.

Around the world, we are witnessing an upsurge in
hate speech and violence towards minorities. The
past few years have been shadowed by the rise of

16
72.

73.

74.

715.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Islamophobia in particular.

We are appalled by the alarming trend of hatred,

intolerance, and acts of violence against Muslims.

This cannot continue. In the era of globalisation,
there is room for everyone to coexist. And it is our
job, under the banner of a united world, to ensure
that peace will prevail.

We must take action NOW. Malaysia urges for the
prompt appointment of the UN Special Envoy to

Combat Islamophobia.

We stand ready to support any efforts undertaken by
the UN, towards nurturing dialogue between
communities, that will promote worldwide

acceptance and understanding.
76.

7.

78.

79.

80.

FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

While Islamophobia is a threat to Muslims, a broader
issue of hatred against the followers of any religion,
will undermine the universal values of justice and

peace, that we all vowed to protect.

Mr. President,

We stand on the eve of eighty years of the United
Nations. We have achieved wonders together. Ours

is a story of the modern successes of humankind.

Together, we have delivered food to the starving. We
have eradicated diseases. We took decisive action,
against aPARtheid in the 20th century, and we must

do it again now.

Let our commitment to justice never fail, no matter

how formidable the task.

Let there be no doubt: the question of Gaza is a
direct test, of the capability of the United Nations. Let
this 76-year-old issue not age into a century of our

failure to uphold justice.
18
FINAL
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

81. Westrongly call for an end to the occupation, and for
the Israeli regime to comply, with the decision of the
International Court of Justice.

Mr. President,

82. Let our dreams ofa free Palestine live beyond today,
and beyond the words that we say.

Thank you.
