Republic of Namibia

THE PRESIDENCY

STATEMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY DR. NANGOLO
MBUMBA, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA AT
THE 79th SESSION OF THE UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY

25 SEPTEMBER 2024
NEW YORK
Your Excellency, Philemon Yang, President of the General
Assembly,

Your Excellencies, Heads of State and Government,

Your Excellency Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of
the United Nations,

Distinguished Delegates,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

1. Namibia congratulates Your Excellency, on your
election as President of the seventy ninth Session of
the General Assembly. I also extend my
appreciation to your predecessor, H.E. Dennis
Francis, for successfully steering the Assembly
through trying times. It was during the 78th Session
where the relevance of the Assembly's work
repeatedly came to the fore through reaffirmations.

Mr. President,

2. The theme for this General Debate—"Leaving no one
behind: acting together for the advancement of
peace, sustainable development, and human dignity
for present and future generations” — aligns

perfectly with our shared aspirations for effective
international cooperation. In this regard, the
adoption of the "Pact for the Future” and its
annexes on the 23rd of September 2024, is
encouraging. Namibia is proud to have served
alongside Germany as co-facilitator of the Summit
of the Future. I congratulate delegates for their

commitment that brought the Pact to fruition.

Namibia’s interest in the Pact for the Future is
grounded in the understanding that multilateral
institutions, including the Security Council do not
represent African needs and aspirations. The
institutions created in 1945 must better respond to
today’s challenges.

At the core of the Pact is this recognition and the
urgency for profound global transformation. At the
heart of our quest to rebuild trust in multilateralism
is a legitimate demand to be recognized as equal
partners. Partners who can be trusted. Partners in
the fight against war, poverty, global injustice and
inequality.
Mr. President,

5. Namibia is particularly concerned about the impact
of climate change. Changes in ocean temperatures
have affected our fish stocks with potential long-
term consequences for our livelihoods, ecosystems,
and tourism. Namibia and the rest of the SADC
region are going through the El Nifo phenomenon
which has adversely impacted food security. In this
regard, Namibia had to declare a State of
Emergency to address the severe effects of drought.

Mr. President,

6. As we approach the 30th anniversary of the Beijing
Declaration, we are presented with a renewed
opportunity to strengthen gender equality. Namibia
remains among the top nine countries globally that
have closed at least 80% of the gender gap. In the
past 12 months, we have achieved perfect parity in
the National Assembly, where 50% _ of

representatives are women.
7. Namibia is preparing for the 8th Presidential and
National Assembly Elections on 27 November 2024.
Political parties, including the ruling party have
nominated female candidates. We hope that the
United Nations will have a female Secretary-General

in the near future.

Mr. President,

8. Namibia is working to develop a sustainable energy
mix to support its ambitious industrialization
agenda and to contribute to the world’s efforts to
combat climate change. We are establishing green
industrialization ecosystems, for decarbonizing
industries that find it difficult to lower their

greenhouse emissions.

9. Investment in these key sectors is critical and
Namibia is urging developed nations to scale up
support for developing countries to facilitate

gradual energy transitions.
Mr. President,

10. Turning to international peace and security, there is
an urgent need for this Assembly to support the
modalities to actualize the advisory opinion
rendered by the International Court of Justice

regarding the ongoing conflict in Gaza.

11. Prolonged occupation does not justify or make
acceptable the hardships and injustices endured.
This is particularly true for the people of Gaza, who
continue to be brutally massacred. As a country that
has endured genocide, Namibia believes that Israel,
by intent and by action, is committing genocide.
Namibia continues to call for a ceasefire and for
humanitarian assistance to flow unhindered into

Gaza.

Mr. President,

12. Economic hardships continue to affect the sister
Republic of Cuba, in stark contrast to the ideals of
inclusivity and the goal of leaving no one behind.
Namibia calls for the end of the economic, financial,
and commercial blockade against Cuba. Namibia
also reiterates its call for the immediate and
unconditional lifting of illegal sanctions against
Zimbabwe, which hinders the country’s capacity to

achieve Sustainable Development Goals.

13. A further affront to the United Nations Charter, its
purposes, and principles is the _ continued
disenfranchisement of the people of Western
Sahara, who are denied their right to self-
determination. This 79t* Session of UNGA must do

more to change this situation.

Mr. President,

14. In conclusion, Namibia is a child of international
solidarity, midwifed by the United Nations, and
therefore remains its firm proponent. The United
Nations system can be strengthened if we hold
hands and work together as bridge builders as
illustrated by the Summit of the Future. By
choosing the way of collaboration over enmity,
peaceful dialogue over war and conflict, and de-
escalation over escalation, we can achieve our
shared goal of a more peaceful, just and prosperous

world.

Thank you
