NEW ZEALAND
PERMANENT MISSION
Te Aka Aorere

New Zealand Permanent Mission to the United Nations
Te Aka Aorere

United Nations General Debate of the
Seventy-Ninth Session

New Zealand Statement delivered by
Rt Hon Winston Peters, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of
Foreign Affairs and Minister for Racing of New Zealand

Thursday 26 September 2024

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

‘The Spirit of San Francisco’
Mr. President.

Nearly four score years ago, nations exhausted from a cataclysmic World
War came together in San Francisco to create the United Nations Charter.
Forged in the immediate aftermath of that war, then New Zealand Prime
Minister Peter Fraser held “the greatest hopes” for the Charter’s success,
which he believed would be predicated on the “sincerity and moral
determination” of its members.

But the beginning is a delicate time, and Fraser was also a realist. He
understood the Charter was imperfect. From the earliest debates in San
Francisco, New Zealand fought against the veto rights bestowed upon the
Great Powers.

Fraser warned that “The veto which can be exercised by one of the Great
Powers both in regard to itself and other nations is unfair and indefensible
and may, if retained and exercised, be destructive not only of the main
purposes of the international organization, but of the institution itself.”

But Fraser knew that the United Nations Charter could only be secured with
the Great Powers’ agreement. And though he considered the Charter
imperfect, he thought those imperfections could “be overcome if the spirit of
San Francisco is carried into the operation of the Charter.”

The spirit of San Francisco incorporated the hope that the Great Powers
behave prudently, for as Winston Churchill said, “The price of greatness is
responsibility.”

But today the spirit that created the United Nations Charter is sagging under
the weight of its own potted history. Power waxes and wanes so yesterday’s
‘Great Powers’, today’s Permanent Members of the Security Council, are
challenged by periods of competition or worse, abuse of the veto.

This has serious implications for all states and the conduct of our foreign
affairs. While some Permanent Members exercise restraint in their use of the
veto, others consistently and frequently abuse this power.
When Russia, a permanent member of the Security Council, illegally invaded
its neighbour, it did not just violate Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter, it
acted in utter contempt of the Charter. Russia then vetoed a draft Security
Council resolution condemning its actions and calling for the immediate
withdrawal of its forces from Ukraine. Not only does Russia lack the sincerity
and moral determination required to make the United Nations work, but its
delinquency should be a clarion call for long overdue Security Council reform.

As Prime Minister Fraser said back in 1946, when referring to the veto’s risks,
that “it is very bad if one nation can hold up the advancement of mankind.”

The world of 2024 looks very unlike the one of 1945, and so our collective
institutions need to evolve and reflect contemporary realities. We need a UN
Security Council that looks more like today’s world, and we need veto reform.

Tensions and imbalances — between the desire for a rules-based
international order that protects small states against aggression, and the
unjustified exercise of power by certain Great Powers — have only grown
these past eight decades.

Yet small states matter now as much as they did then. New Zealand holds
the foundational belief that all states are equal and that our voices matter as
much as the more powerful states represented here. It is the quality of our
arguments and the principles of justice that inform them, not the size of our
militaries, that should hold sway here.

We smaller nations face many of the same challenges and share the same
concerns. As my colleague from Singapore, Dr Vivian Balakrishnan, put it at
this year’s East Asia Summit Foreign Ministers Meeting in Laos:

“The problem for us is that every small state that wants territorial
integrity to be respected, that wants its political independence to be
guarded, that depends on the UN Charter to plan long-term, must view
an invasion of a smaller neigbour by a larger neighbour...as a full-
frontal point of anxiety.”

We agree. We small states need today’s superpowers to talk more, seek
better understanding between them, and develop ways of compromising
more. Rather than a zero-sum game, effecting better relations between
today’s “Great Powers” only enhances global stability, and that is what we
smaller nations seek.

The regional and global challenges we face are stark, the worst the world
has faced since World War II. Those challenges are complex and daunting.

Across the globe, armed conflict is once more on the rise; hard fought
development gains are being reversed, human rights challenged and eroded,
and geostrategic tensions are threatening global security and stability.

Growing distrust and division is making international cooperation more
difficult, placing the United Nations under strain, and hindering the
organisation’s ability to find effective solutions.

The world is facing a myriad of regional and global crises. We see multiple,
intersecting, and mutually reinforcing crises of conflict, climate change, and
increasingly, a crisis of trust in our institutions. So the challenges we face in
the General Assembly are stark, the worst in several generations.

They also reinforce the truism that the global geostrategic and security
challenges faced in one era do not remain static. The world has changed,
and so must we.

Indeed, each generation of decision-makers confronts new challenges as
economies, demographics, technologies, and societies evolve, as do the
power calculations that accompany disruptive change.

Old truths give way to new ones. The trick now, as it was then, is to have
one’s eyes wide open about the fundamental shifts that are taking place and
be nimble enough to adapt to them. The need to adapt to changing historical
contexts is also incumbent on the United Nations and its organisations. The
rise of mini-lateral agreements is one sign of countries increasingly working
together outside of the United Nations. Another is the sclerosis around
necessary veto reform.

In the 10 months since returning for a third time as New Zealand’s Foreign
Minister, we have spoken widely with colleagues across the globe. Summing
up those discussions in a recent speech in Tokyo, we said that never has it
been more apparent just how much diplomacy and the tools of statecraft
matter in our troubled world.

And since war and instability is everyone’s calamity, diplomacy is the
business of us all. We observed that at this moment in time the ability to talk
with, rather than at, each other has never been more needed.

Those who share our values, and even those who do not, gain from
understanding each other’s position, even when we cannot agree. From
understanding comes opportunity and from diplomacy comes compromise,
the building block of better relations between nations. We need more
diplomacy, more engagement, more compromise.

As Churchill also said in his later years, “meeting jaw to jaw is better than
war.”

Never has it been more apparent just how much political leadership is
required to respond to the international challenges we face. Leadership is
needed to restore trust in our domestic and international institutions, forge
unity, and fill the gaps when the international community, through the United
Nations, proves unable to.

What does that leadership look like?

It is leadership that can discern future opportunity while understanding but
not being trapped by historical constraints. It is leadership that is
underpinned by a leader’s strength of character — their courage, their
purpose, and a commitment to educate, not dominate their citizens.

Given he will turn 100 in the next few days, we recall with admiration such
leadership, exhibited by then President Jimmy Carter in 1978, in concert with
Egypt’s President Anwar Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin.
They talked for 11 straight days at Camp David, from which emerged the
Middle East Peace Accords between Egypt and Israel.

That peace has endured, and New Zealand is proud as a foundational
member of the Multinational Force and Observers to have supported that
peace since 1982.
The Accords reveal what is possible when leaders exhibit sincerity and moral
determination, imbued by the spirit of San Francisco. We need more of this
type of leadership and responsibility.

Contrast that leadership with the catastrophic and ruinous path that has been
followed in Gaza. This misery was caused by both Hamas’ monstrous
terrorist attacks last year and the now overwhelming nature of Israel’s
response. We are most concerned about the generational consequences of
this level of suffering and violence, with no end in sight and which sees us
on the precipice of an even wider conflict.

Where is the sincerity and moral determination of today’s leaders at the
vortex of this unacceptable violence?

New Zealand has sacrificed many of its young men to wars in faraway lands.
Fully 10 percent of the total population of New Zealand fought in the Great
War, and we lost a fifth of them. So every year, on the Twenty-fifth of April,
we commemorate their loss at Gallipoli, the site of terrible carnage.

This year in a dawn address we recalled that despite the horror of war on the
Gallipoli Peninsula, fraternal bonds were forged between warring nations,
countries who were once enemies became friends.

New Zealand never wants to experience the catastrophe of another World
War. There must never be another San Francisco conference picking up the
pieces after another descent into global annihilation and human suffering.

So we must do more. Demand more. And deliver more.
We must reject and resist those who seek to conquer and control.

We must always seek the path of peace because the lasting victories of
humanity are those of peace, not war.

Finally, despite our frustration at the lack of political will required to adapt this
organisation to fully meet the challenges of today, New Zealand’s support for
the United Nations remains unwavering. That commitment is unchanged
from when Prime Minister Fraser expressed his great hopes for the Charter
eight decades ago.
We believe effective multilateral diplomacy means taking responsibility for
our obligations as member states. So, to that end, we announce today New
Zealand’s intention, as a voice for small states, to campaign for a seat on the
Security Council for the 2039-40 term.

That intention is supported by our enduring hope:

- that the spirit of San Francisco can be reclaimed through the sincerity
and moral determination of our diplomatic efforts;

- that we can all do better, and;

- that it reinforces our enduring support for the United Nations and the
cause of peace.
