National Intervention by the President of Romania, Klaus
lohannis, during the general debates of the 79th General

Assembly of the United Nations
19:00 | 25 September 2024 |

Mr. President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Secretary General,
Excellencies,

We have all gathered here, the world leaders, with the responsibility of a better global vision
and the will to make it happen.

There is no better and more representative framework than our 79 years-old United
Nations, anchored in the UN Charter and the International Law.

However insecure the world is today, the answer to our problems will always be more
cooperation and more solidarity.

Romania will always uphold the international world order, with the UN at its core.
If we want to find the solutions, we need to have a more responsible look at our world. To
understand its challenges.

Let us remember what brought us here together in the first place. Peace as a state of spirit,
as a purpose, as a tool.

Regrettably, we see around the globe that insecurity, violence, conflicts and even war have
taken a firm grip on our world.

Our main challenge is finding the much-needed solutions to restore and safeguard peace.
Otherwise, the international order and the international law are ours to lose.

When diplomacy is the most difficult tool to use, it is precisely then when we need to use it
most.

Look at the dire global consequences of the Russian war against Ukraine. It has unleashed
the greatest security crisis in Europe in recent history, in breach of the international law and
with implications going well beyond Europe.

In this context, Romania has extended a strong, multidimensional support for Ukraine and
its people and we are committed to maintain it for as long as it is needed.

At the same time, Romania will continue its unwavering support to consolidate the
resilience of the Republic of Moldova, the second most affected country by this war.

Our security is not regional, it is global. This brutal war has already harmed nations and
people across the world.

Food security stands proof. My country has a crucial role in facilitating the grain exports
from Ukraine through our ports on the Danube and at the Black Sea.

A long-term conflict is unacceptable and we must stay the course. Ukraine needs the
resolute support of all UN Member States determined to uphold the international law and
the United Nations Charter.

Romania fully supports the Peace Initiative of President Zelensky: it is the only approach to
ensure a just and lasting peace, in full agreement with the UN Charter and the international
law.

Ladies and gentlemen,
Protecting all civilians must remain our common objective.

Almost a year ago, the heinous attack committed by Hamas against Israeli civilians has
shocked the world.
Against the spiral of violence that followed, our actions based on Security Council
Resolutions should prevail.

The end of hostilities, a safe release of all hostages and facilitation of the safe shipment of
the humanitarian aid for the civilians in Gaza are imperatives no one can deny.

Furthermore, we support all efforts to resume the political process based on the Two-state
solution, coexisting in peace and security, within safe and recognized borders.

More broadly, around the world, there are alarming calls to stop blatant violations of
human rights, under many forms and rooted in different causes.

There is a sense of urgency that remains unanswered.

Conflict prevention and peacekeeping are essential tools in this regard. At the same time,
we must support the cooperation with regional organizations, in view of their role in
preventing, keeping and enforcing peace.

Distinguished audience,

The impact of climate change is a growing threat to our security and its consequences are
already obvious.

As these negative events increase, they impact demography, economies, energy,
connectivity, and geopolitics.

It is vital to further enhance international cooperation and ensure the much needed civil
protection mechanisms.

Romania actively participates at international level in the exercises, projects and actions to
provide emergency response, especially to limit the impact of wildfires.

The UN system is essential to mainstream our efforts and to create synergies. We need to
accelerate our work to keep the 1.5°C target alive.

And, since climate change is a threat multiplier, Romania supports an integrated approach
to the climate and security nexus within the United Nations system.

Green transition also includes energy transition, while ensuring energy security, as an
important development marker.

Ladies and gentleman,

We live in an era when we could fully enjoy the opportunities offered by information,
innovation, and connections.
Nevertheless, instead of harnessing their potential to our common benefit, we see
increased distrust and hatred; we see polarisation and rise of extremism instead of
coexistence and tolerance.

Technology misuses, disinformation and other hybrid tools are at the centre of the problem
with the aim of undermining our security.

In such times, it has become way easier to destroy than to build. But it is now that we need
to seek strength in global institutions, principles and values.

All of those which serve to safeguard human dignity; and human dignity cannot be secured
without human rights.

They are never optional and continue to stand as one of the fundamental pillars of the UN
system.

In this regard, international legal instruments have a crucial role.

For example, in digital transition. We see that technology is a global amplifier of trends. It is
up to us to decide whether it will contribute to more effective and accessible public
services.

We also have to recognize the essential role of civil society, the human rights defenders,
and the involvement of youth in advancing human rights.

We are also following the situation of gender equality and the fight against gender violence.

Romania is a firm supporter of gender equality, which we promote as member of the
Human Rights Council and, most recently, of the Commission on the Status of Women.

Distinguished audience,

There is no viable alternative to the United Nations and the principles upon the
Organization was built, which remain more valid than ever.

Our focus now is to continue the UN reform, so that it will be fit to address current
challenges and the ones looming.

Amore effective and more efficient United Nations.

Amore representative United Nations, where trust can be fostered. Romania advocates for
an extended Security Council where transparency and accountability are the norm, not the
exception.
AUN more accessible to the public and more meaningful. Where youth can have a say on
matters affecting them. Where the voices of the civil society and other stakeholders are
heard.

That is why a Pact for the Future was so urgently required. To give fresh shape and purpose
to our vision for the next generations.

Finally, the United Nations as a continuous aspiration for a better world. From those who
dreamed of peace and tolerance, to those who will never stop fighting for it.

Aworld where sovereignty, territorial integrity, international law, and human rights are
respected. Where each country can choose its own path, with dignity and free from
aggression.

Where every citizen is safe and free.
This is our credo. And this is our call to action.

Thank you very much!

Source: National Intervention by the President of Romania, Klaus lohannis, during the
general debates of the 79th General Assembly of the United Nations (presidency.ro)

