Minister for Foreign Affairs
Dr Vivian Balakrishnan's National Statement
at the General Debate of the 79th Session
of the United Nations General Assembly
New York, 28 September 2024

MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS DR VIVIAN BALAKRISHNAN’S NATIONAL STATEMENT
AT THE

GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 79 SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL
ASSEMBLY IN NEW YORK,

28 SEPTEMBER 2024

“Transforming the United Nations for Future Generations”

Mdm President, Your Excellencies

1 | bring you greetings from a tiny island city state in the heart of Southeast Asia,
called Singapore. | think we must be one of the smallest who would now qualify as a
member of the United Nations for the past 59 years. | would like to congratulate His
Excellency Philemon Yang on assuming the Presidency of the 79" Session of the General
Assembly, and | also commend His Excellency Dennis Francis for his stellar leadership

during the 78" Session.
2 The world is in an acutely dangerous phase. Civilians in multiple trouble spots are
paying a horrendous price. The risks of miscalculation and escalation have sharply
increased, most notably in the Middle East, Ukraine, and Sudan. The loss of so many
innocent lives is heart-breaking and the lack of trust amongst the major powers and the
resulting deficit of global leadership makes it very difficult to find effective, peaceful
solutions to all these ongoing conflicts.

3 We are approaching the 80" anniversary of the founding of the UN and we must
double down on our commitment to a rules-based multilateral system. On almost every
issue confronting the world — from peace and security to climate change, from the ocean to
outer space, and from poverty to food insecurity, a reformed UN is absolutely essential for
global solutions. The UN remains the only neutral and universal platform for dialogue and
cooperation amongst all nations.

4 The Summit of the Future was a very significant milestone for the UN and our
multilateral system. The adoption of the Pact for the Future offers the hope that nations
can reach agreement given wise leadership and political will. The Pact begins the
journey to transform our multilateral system and to maintain the salience of the UN.

We must accelerate the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
reinvigorate international cooperation, and transform global governance. That is why
Singapore has always been a staunch supporter of the Summit of the Future. We stand
ready to work with our friends to implement the Pact.

5 | would like to highlight three points.

6 First, we must return to the basics — by reinforcing the foundational role of the

UN in maintaining international peace and security. That is the raison d’étre for the
UN. We must restore respect for the rule of law and the UN Charter. This has underpinned
global peace and security for the last 80 years.

7 We cannot allow recent violations of international law to become normalised. The
ongoing war in Ukraine exemplifies a flagrant violation of international law and the UN
Charter. The invasion of one country by another, under the pretext of historical errors and
grievances, cannot be justified by any means. Article Two of the UN Charter is categorical:
all members shall refrain from the threat or the use of force against territorial integrity of
any state. It is also worth recalling that is why the preamble of the Security Council
resolution 242 passed in 1967 also contains or refers to the “inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by war”. If we allow the notion that “might is right” to prevail, the
world will become a very dangerous place, especially for small states. That is why
Singapore and other small states have to consistently stand for compliance with, by all
member states with international law and the UN Charter.

8 We as a small state, have no interest in taking sides or getting embroiled in great
power rivalry. We do not want to become an arena for proxy wars. We simply aim to defend
our sovereignty, to exercise our autonomy, and to chart our own futures — our people
deserve that. This is why small states like Singapore have always been ardent advocates for
international law and the UN Charter. For small states, multilateralism and international
law is not an option; it is in fact an existential necessity.

9 Last week, Singapore in collaboration with the International Peace Institute (IPI),
launched a report on small states and transforming global governance. The report,
prepared by the IPI and the Rajaratnam School of International Studies (RSIS) in Singapore,
highlights the priorities and the perspectives of small states. We hope that this report will
catalyse further discussions on strengthening and transforming the UN and the multilateral
system.
10 Excellencies, the work to strengthen international law and the existing international
legal frameworks is an ongoing exercise. Singapore will continue to strongly support the
work of the International Court of Justice, which is paramount for upholding the rule of
law and protecting the interests of all countries, especially small states.

11 The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) is absolutely crucial and
especially for an island city state like Singapore, totally dependent on trade; in fact, our
trade volume is three times our GDP. UNCLOS sets out the legal framework within which all
activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out. Freedom of navigation and overflight
is a universal right. It is not merely an optional privilege granted by the grace of whoever
claims the seas. UNCLOS also provides an essential foundation for coordinating our efforts
on issues such as sea-level rise, plastic pollution, the loss of biodiversity, and ocean
acidification. As we celebrate the 30" anniversary of the entry into force of UNCLOS this
year, we call on all countries that have not yet done so to ratify UNCLOS and to do so as
soon as possible.

12 We also need to develop new instruments to strengthen international legal
frameworks. The consensus adoption of the BBNJ Agreement in June last year was a
crucial step in strengthening the UNCLOS framework concerning the conservation and the
sustainable use of the oceans and its resources. | am pleased to announce that Singapore
ratified the BBNJ Agreement earlier this week.

13 The UN plays a critical role in formulating new rules, norms and principles governing
the global commons. For example, the UN has made good progress in establishing a
framework for responsible state behaviour in cyberspace, a process that we in Singapore
have always supported.
14 Singapore also supports the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace and we
stand ready to work with all UN members to strengthen the role of the UN in promoting
peace and security, particularly in preventive diplomacy, mediation, and conflict
prevention. Such efforts are urgently needed to save civilian lives and to prevent
catastrophes.

15 Singapore remains a steadfast supporter of the UN’s humanitarian efforts. We are
gravely concerned with the deteriorating humanitarian crisis in Gaza and the sheer scale of
human suffering. The Singapore Government, along with our NGOs and our citizens, have
contributed more than $$17 million in humanitarian aid and donations for Gaza, including
through UNICEF and UNRWA. We have consistently emphasised the need for the safe and
unhindered provision of humanitarian aid to all civilians in need. We reiterate our call for an
immediate ceasefire, and for the immediate, unconditional, and safe release of all
hostages. Singapore will continue to provide more support for the civilians in Gaza.

16 Second, we must intensify efforts to support the implementation of the SDGs.
With less than six years remaining, we are still far from achieving the 2030 Agenda. To fulfil
the promise of “leaving no one behind”, we must support the poorest and most vulnerable
countries and this is important because sustainable development provides the foundation
for peace and security.

17 We need to accelerate our collective efforts in combating climate change. As a
smallisland state, Singapore is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change,
and especially sea-level rise. We welcome the high-level meeting held earlier this week on
this issue. Although our share of global emissions is actually very small, we remain fully
committed to peaking our emissions before 2030 and to achieving net-zero by 2050.
18 The Fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States, or
SIDS4, earlier this year marked a significant milestone for all SIDS. We welcome the
adoption of the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS, which outlines an action plan for the
next decade. Singapore will support our friends in SIDS. We launched a new technical
assistance package at SIDS4, called “SIDS of Change”, which covers priority areas
including blue carbon.

19 Singapore will continue to support our fellow small states, we will share our
development experience. | am happy to announce that Singapore will renew our capacity-
building programme for the Forum of Small States, or FOSS. We have labelled this
programme “FOSS for Good”, a package that will offer digital-themed programmes,
including “Leadership and Governance in the Age of Digital Technologies and Artificial
Intelligence”.

20 Third, we need to empower and transform the UN so that it is future-ready and
capable of responding to the emerging global challenges.To achieve this, several
measures are necessary.

21 We must provide more opportunities for young people especially, to engage in the
work of the UN and to serve as agents of change to revitalise international cooperation. We
welcome the adoption of the Declaration on Future Generations, which underscores our
collective commitment to building a world that serves the interests of future generations.
After all, our young people have even more at stake.

22 Next, we must harness the power of digital technologies, in a safe and secure
manner. The adoption of the Global Digital Compact is a significant step forward, offering
a pathway to close the digital divide. The Compact contains an action-oriented set of
commitments that can accelerate the implementation of the SDGs.
23 We are witnessing the dawn of the age of Al. By now, the promises and the perils of
Al are well-known to all of us. We need to empower innovation in Al, whilst installing global
guardrails to protect human safety, human dignity and values. Therefore, initiating a
dialogue on the global governance of Al is imperative. Singapore welcomes the report of
the High-Level Advisory Body on Al, and we commit to working with all UN members to
further develop these recommendations.

24 Finally, we must transform global governance by making our institutions more
representative, more responsive, and more effective, particularly for the sake of small
states and developing countries. We need a more nimble multilateral system in which the
international financial architecture and the UN work more synergistically.

25 Equally important is the need to reform the UN itself, to make it more efficient,
effective and responsive. That includes reforming the UN Security Councilin order to
reflect the contemporary realities, through an expansion in both the permanent and non-
permanent membership categories.

26 The effective functioning of the Security Council is at the heart of a robust and
responsive UN. The five Permanent Members of the Security Council have a special
responsibility that accompanies their privilege. And they must demonstrate leadership by
cooperating to maintain international peace and security. The veto initiative has made the
use of the veto more accountable by making the Permanent Members answerable to all of
us in the General Assembly every time they cast a veto. This is a good first step, but it is not
the end of that journey that is necessary. Much more work is needed to make the Security
Council more transparent and accountable. Singapore will continue to work with other UN
member states in this regard.
27 Mdm President, Excellencies, the world is traversing an acutely dangerous period of
geopolitical tension. A descent into chaos and conflict is a clear and present threat. In this
moment of uncertainty, all countries, big and small, have a responsibility to work together
to preserve the peace and to save lives. We cannot achieve this without the UN playing its
rightful role as an arena for dialogue and for partnership. This is the moment to double
down on multilateralism and strengthen the role of the UN as a collective vehicle for peace
and sustainable development.

28 Thank you, Excellencies.

Source: https://www.mfa.gov.sg/Newsroom/Press-Statements-Transcripts-and-
Photos/2024/09/20240929-UNGA-National-Statement

