of, we Ly
very

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Statement by the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of San Marino
H.E. Luca Beccarti
79th Session of the UN General Assembly
New York, 28 September 2024

Mr. President,

Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies,

Ladies and Gentlemen,

On behalf of the Government of the Republic of San Marino, I
would like to congratulate H.E. Mr. Philemon Yang on his election
as President of the 79" Session of the UN General Assembly and
to wish him a fruitful work.

The Republic of San Marino supports the priorities of your
programme and ensures you, Mr. President, full cooperation in all
works of the General Assembly.

I would also like to extend my special thanks to Secretary General
Anténio Guterres for his energy and determination in leading the
United Nations in these difficult and challenging times.
Wists Nd

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Mr. President,

The coming years will be crucial not only for our future, but for
that of generations to come.

The young generations have the right to live in peace and security
and in harmony with nature. We should not forget that the world,
especially the young generations, is watching us.

Regrettably, we are facing an increasing number of crisis and an
unprecedented number of armed conflicts around the world.

Furthermore, the implementation of the 2030 Agenda has been
slowed down by an international context of uncertainty, a
combined planetary crisis of climate change, pollution, and
biodiversity loss, aggravated by the shocks of war, destabilisation
and increased fragility.

The impact of multiple crises is felt most severely by the poorest
and most vulnerable, thus increasing poverty and inequalities within
and between countries.

Achieving sustainable development is a big part of the challenges
we face and the 2030 Agenda remains our collective roadmap to
addressing them.

The Summit of the Future is an opportunity to accelerate the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda, including delivery on the SDG
t
*

Uf porta \.)
any)

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Summit commitments and renew out commitment to leave no one

behind.

Through our renewed commitments, the Pact for the Future can
rebuild trust in multilateralism and in our ability to jointly address
global challenges.

In this regard, we appreciate that the Pact for the Future adequately
reflects ambitious actions in all three interrelated pillars of the UN:
development, peace and security, and human rights.

These aspects are intertwined, interconnected, and together can
make or break the world we build for ourselves and our children.

We also support the reaffirmation of the centrality of the 2030
Agenda, of human rights and gender equality, and of urgent actions
to protect global climate. No country should have to choose
between fighting poverty and fighting for the planet. The Republic
of San Marino fully believes that respecting human rights for all
and achieving gender equality are prerequisites, if we truly want to
achieve sustained, inclusive, equitable economic growth and
sustainable development.

We would also like to underline the paramount role played by
digital technologies in the achievement of the 17 SDGs, however
we want to emphasize the importance of global cooperation in
order to leave no one behind and in order to build a cyberspace
4, by
Wey
(O}

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

that reflects global standards for peace and security, human rights
and sustainable development.

Mr. President,

San Marino sees an urgent need to strengthen our collective
support for a rules-based international system rooted in the UN.
We unequivocally support this institution’s foundational basics —
which include the purposes and principles of the UN Charter as
well as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and
existing obligations under international human rights law.

In these times of widespread violations, it is crucial to recommit to
the UN Charter and its values in order to maintaining international
peace and security, taking effective collective measures for the
prevention of conflict and for the suppression of acts of
aggression.

We support the recommendations of the Secretary General’s New
Agenda for Peace and welcome the new intensified efforts on
conflict prevention.
4, by
Wey
(O}

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The recognition of the interdependence of peace and security,
sustainable development, and human rights is fundamental if
we want to achieve credible results.

We support the request for the Secretary General to continue to
develop new models of peace operations, and the recognition of
the role of regional organizations in enforcing or maintaining
peace.

Mr. President,

We are facing challenging times, with an unprecedented level of

violence, mass atrocities and displacement.

San Marino is deeply concern about the number and the scale of
armed conflicts across the globe, which cause immense suffering to
millions of civilians.

The unprecedented rise in global military expenditure is alarming,

too.

We are also very concerned about the upsetting increase of
dangerous nuclear rhetoric and by the specter of nuclear escalation.

The Republic of San Marino firmly condemns any use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons and considers such threats irresponsible
and unjustifiable. Any use of nuclear weapons would have
catastrophic and unspeakable consequences for humanity.
very
(O}

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Unfortunately, today, due to increasing tensions, due to the
deterioration of the disarmament architecture, to the use of new
emerging technologies, including artificial intelligence and due to
the possibilities of cyberattacks, the risk of nuclear weapons use,
either deliberately or by accident, is higher than at any time since
the cold war.

We commend the Secretary General of this Organization for
having emphasized the need to eliminate nuclear weapons as a
necessary action in the New Agenda for Peace.

San Marino reaffirms its commitment for a world free of nuclear
weapons and attaches great importance to the historic Treaty on
the Prohibition of nuclear weapons, whose fatifications are

constantly increasing.

Mr. President,

The war of aggression against Ukraine brought dramatic
consequences for the civilian population, including civilian death,
the destruction of vital infrastructures, and massive displacement.

We reiterate our resolute condemnation of the Russian Federation’s
ageression against Ukraine, and reaffirm our unwavering support
for Ukraine’s political independence, sovereignty, and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
Wists Nd

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

In the true spirit of multilateral and international cooperation, San
Marino took part to Summit on Peace in Ukraine held in
Switzerland last June.

We support all the international efforts aiming to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace for Ukraine based on the UN
Charter and international law.

Mr. President,

The Republic San Marino has firmly and repeatedly condemned the
horrific terrorist attacks of October 7*.

San Marino calls for the immediate and unconditional release of all
hostages, condemns the torture and sexual violence perpetrated
against them, and recognizes Israel’s right to defend itself within
humanitarian and international law.

At the same time, we cannot remain silent in front of the death of
mote than 40,000 civilians, most of them children and women;
more than 90.000 Palestinians have been reported injured, while the
majority of houses and hospitals have been damaged, raided or
emptied. The level of destruction and of suffering in Gaza is
unprecedented.
Gry

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The civilian suffering, the civilian death toll and the ongoing
captivity of hostages are heartbreaking and unacceptable.

We urge all parties to fully respect international humanitarian law,
preserving the life, dignity and humanity of all people affected by
armed conflict.

Furthermore, the tragic death of UNRWA staff members, and of
other humanitarian workers and of journalists cannot be tolerated.

San Marino has joined several initiatives in order to alleviate the
catastrophic humanitarian situation of civilians in Gaza and has
made financial contributions to UNRWA, UNICEF and OCHA in
order to support the work of these agencies, that have been
operating in highly challenging conditions.

The international community must break this terrible cycle of
violence and recommit to a lasting peace, restoring hope and
security to Israelis and Palestinians through a renewed peace

process.

San Marino remains committed to a lasting and sustainable
peace based on the two-States solution, in which Israel and
Palestine live side by side, in peace and security and mutual
recognition.
Wists Nd

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

San Marino reiterates its calls for an immediate ceasefire and for a
return to dialogue to address the legitimate concerns of the State of
Israel and the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people.

A lasting and sustainable peace based on the two-States solution is
the only long-term option for peace and, for this reason, we believe
that the admission of Palestine to the UN, as full member, would
facilitate the achievement of this solution. San Marino welcomes
the resolution adopted in May 2024 at the Tenth Emergency
Special Session, which upgrades Palestine’s rights at the United
Nations as an observer State, urging the Security Council to
favorably consider its full membership.

Mr. President,

The spiral of death and devastation has already extended to
Lebanon. This represents a threatening escalation of the conflict
that is further destabilizing the entire region.

We therefore stress the need for restraint.

Mr. President,

Respect for international law and accountability are key factors that
play a crucial role in preventing and stopping violations and crimes.
4, by
Wey

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

We reaffirm our commitment to the UN Charter and to the
principles of the Responsibility to Protect which is essential in
the prevention of atrocity crimes. We are deeply worried about the
disregard and violations of international law.

The Republic of San Marino reaffirms its full commitment to the
obligations under human and humanitarian law, such as the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime
of Genocide, the Rome Statute and the Geneva Conventions.

San Marino reaffirms its full support to the International
Criminal Court, whose work is crucial in the fight against impunity

for genocide and crimes against humanity.

The Republic of San Marino would also like to reiterate its support
for initiatives such as the ACT Group’s Code of Conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide, war crimes or
crimes against humanity and the French and Mexican
declaration on voluntary restraint use of the veto by the
Permanent Members of the Security Council.

Mr. President,

Protecting civilians from the devastating impact of wars must be
our priority.

10
4 ° a;
ea
(OP

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Armed conflicts around the globe have dramatically impacted the
lives of millions of civilians.

The protection of civilian infrastructure is essential to guarantee
food security in time of conflict.

Food production and distribution, water delivery, sanitation, energy
provision, and health care can all be disrupted, when infrastructures
and tools essential to the survival of civilians are damaged, or
destroyed.

We support Security Council Resolution 2573, which condemns
attacks against critical civilian infrastructures, indispensable for their
sutvival.

San Marino also calls on all parties to achieve the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2417, which condemns the use of
statvation of civilians as a method of warfare as well as the unlawful
denial of humanitarian access.

San Marino is gravely concerned by the scale and scope of grave
violations against children presented in the Secretary-General’s

annual report.

San Marino supports the work of the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict and of her Office, UNICEF, the
Department of Peace Operations, and all child protection actors
from the UN and civil society.

11
4, by
Wey

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Armed conflicts continue to devastate children’s lives and to
compromise their fundamental rights. We are witnessing an
increase in attacks on schools and hospitals. This is unacceptable.

To strengthen the protection of children in armed conflict, we call
all parties to armed conflict to fully comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law,
and with international norms and standards for the protection of
children.

Moreover, we call for full accountability for all grave violations
through national and international justice mechanisms, such as the
International Criminal Court.

We also call on all member States to ratify the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict. We also encourage
all parties to support other important tools, such as the Paris
Principles and Commitments and the Vancouver Principles.

Mr. President,

San Marino believes it is essential to strengthen the global response
to the climate emergency.

12
t
*

Uf porta \.)
any)

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The existential threat caused by the triple planetary crisis of climate
change, biodiversity loss, and pollution should give to all of us a
sense of urgency and priority in tackling this challenge.

We support the commitments taken at COP28 last December,
which include the imperative of transitioning away from fossil fuels
in energy systems in a just, orderly and equitable manner, tripling
renewable energy capacity globally and doubling energy efficiency
by 2030 in line with 1.5-degree pathways.

San Marino is fully committed to decarbonising the global economy
by 2050 and to halting and reversing biodiversity loss by 2030 and
recognize the need to halt pollution, which causes the death of 9
million people annually.

Moreover, we also need to tackle the water crisis, a growing global
threat that will inevitably intensify in the coming 50 years, with
devastating consequences on _ sustainable development, the
environment, and regional peace and stability.

Mr. President,

The increasingly evident interrelationships among global challenges
highlight the need for Member States, today more than ever, to
work together to overcome difficulties.
uC\y
(O}

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The United Nations is the only universal inter-governmental body
based on the sovereign equality of all its members. Its unique role
as the centre for setting goals, harmonizing actions and sharing
experiences to achieve the common ends, such as peace and
security, sustainable development, human rights and the rule of law,
transcends any one nation-state and serves the collective interest of
all nations and peoples.

The centrality and relevance of the UN is not a given. We need a
much stronger focus on collective, global solutions to current and
future challenges, which threaten peace and prosperity for all. We
need to revitalize the United Nations and_ reinvigorate

multilateralism to ensure its continued significance.

To this end, it is essential to rebuild trust in the potential of the
Organization, in its leadership, and, most of all, trust between its
membets and all the stakeholders.

Moreover, the global governance must become mote inclusive and
accountable to be effective, by providing more space for the

participation of civil society and private sector.

In this regard, we need more inclusive international financial
architecture, strengthen a rules-based and equitable financial
system that ensures a more effective and inclusive global economic
governance, with meaningful development impact and
providing space for innovative solutions.

14
very
(O}

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Multilateralism must effectively deliver on peace as a global public
good. Reforms must remain at the centre of our actions because
they are crucial to future world stability and maintenance of
international peace and security.

In this regards, San Marino follows with particular interest the
Security Council reform. As we have stated on previous
occasions, our Country believes that  intergovernmental
negotiations favour the search for an agreement based on a broad
and strong political consensus, able to reflect the interests of all
negotiating groups. San Marino calls for a reform that makes the
Council more democratic, transparent, efficient and accountable.
This goal can be achieved only through a continuous dialogue
among the States and the awareness that overcoming the respective
initial positions is essential to negotiate the broadest agreement
possible.

In conclusion, Mr. President,

We stand at a critical juncture where the steps we take today will
shape the international rules-based order and the UN system for
decades to come.

It is essential to find new ways of working together and to ensure
that multilateral institutions will be able to address the rapid
changes taking place.

15
Wists Nd

ca eal

MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Member States must assume their responsibilities, including that of
making our organization able to fulfil its mandate, which is to

protect the citizens of the world.

San Marino is a State with a strong identity thanks to its century-old
history of peace and freedom. Our State is small, but proud to
bring its contribution to the United Nations Community.

Thank you for your attention.

16
