STATEMENT

by

His Excellency Chandrikapersad Santokhi

President of the Republic of Suriname

on the occasion of the General Debate
of the
79th Session of the
United Nations General Assembly

New York
25 September 2024

Please check against delivery

President of the General Assembly,
Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Excellencies,

Heads of Delegations,

Ladies and Gentlemen,

e Mr. President, this General Assembly, is of historic
significance, as we embark,

e ona process, of recalibrating, international relations,
and establishing, a more effective, multilateral
framework.

e | therefore, extend, my heartfelt congratulations, to
you, Mr. President,

e on your election, to preside, over this esteemed
body, and allow me, to congratulate,

e the outgoing chair, of Trinidad and Tobago, on a job
well done, under difficult circumstances.

Pagina 1 van 15

Mr. President, this organization, was founded, after
two, devastating world wars.

Its original purpose, remains relevant today, to save
current, and future generations,

from the, disastrous consequences, of wars, and
armed conflicts, and foster peace, and political
stability, for sustained, prosperity for all.

We, however, observe instead, that the world is
marked, by a complex, political and security crisis,

weakening, our global, multilateral framework, of
collective solidarity; international law; and respect,
for humanitarian law.

The conflicts, that divide us, are not isolated
incidents.

They are symptoms, of deeper, systemic challenges;
rising inequality; environmental degradation; and
the breakdown, of global trust.

Pagina 2 van 15

e The time has come, to dare, to make bold decisions,
revisit, our global, governance architecture,

e and to recommit, to the original goals, of the United
Nations.

e Mr. President,

e with statistics, showing that countries, are off track,
on the 2030 Agenda, for Sustainable Development,

e while projections, estimate,
that almost 600 million people, will continue to live,
in extreme poverty in 2030,

e it is incumbent on us, to close the gap, between
aspiration, and financing.

e | wish to emphasize, the urgent need, for accelerated
reforms, and coordination, within, the international
financial architecture,

e especially the international financial institutions.

Pagina 3 van 15

The Multidimensional Vulnerability Index (MVI),
offers a comprehensive, and inclusive framework,
that goes, beyond traditional metrics,

to capture, the true complexity, of the
vulnerabilities, of small island developing,
and low-lying coastal states.

We urge, that the MVI, is embedded, in the
operations, of the international, financial
institutions,

Especially, the International Monetary Fund, and the
World Bank.

Apart from the MVI, we see other, financial obstacles
in place, that have a major, negative impact, on our
ability, to generate development.

Especially, de-risking measures, of international
banks which,

are based, on general assessments, and do not
consider the countries reality and, the severe impact,
on development objectives of the country.

Pagina 4 van 15

This, must be addressed head on, if we want, to be
inclusive, rather than exclusive.

Suriname can attest, to the importance, and urgent
need, to reform, the global financial, and political
system,

and to build greater trust, in the multilateral system.

Because of our ranking, we were not eligible, for
several, global financial instruments, to the
detriment, of my people.

Since taking office, in July 2020, my government has

successfully, started a policy, of financial-economic
reforms,

Including, restructuring the debt portfolio,
supported, by an IMF program, and international,
financial institutions.

The impact, of the various crises, and national
efforts, to reform the economy,

has not been easy, for the population,

Pagina 5 van 15

e but we are, on the road, to recovery now, macro-
economic stability, has been achieved.

e We established, a social safety net, and increased
several, social benefits,

e all meant, to make sure, that we did not forget, or
excluded, that part of our population, from
restoring, a healthier economy.

e Mr. President, 2024 statistics, reveal that progress, in
the area, of climate action, is inadequate,

e with global, greenhouse gas emissions, still rising,
despite the need, for reductions.

e Climate action, can no longer, be postponed, nor
ignored.

e Soon we will meet, in Azerbaijan for COP 29.

e Will we, be repeating ourselves, with empty
promises, and pledges?

Pagina 6 van 15

Or will we, take decisive action, to save this planet,
from extinction.

Mr. President, Suriname is committed, to the Paris
Agreement.

Suriname has also, submitted ambitious, nationally
determined, contributions,

and has recently, started the process, of carbon
credit trading.

Suriname aims, to remain, a carbon negative
country, with a high level, of biodiversity, and more
than, 90% forest coverage.

With this conscious choice, to limit deforestation, we
sacrifice, economic development, for our people.

For this we are not compensated, while everyone,
benefits, from our decision.

Carbon negative, and carbon neutral countries, must
be supported, for maintaining that status.

Pagina 7 van 15

We are in favor, of a just transition, to a carbon-less
economy, over the coming decades,

but we also expect, to be allowed, to develop, our
natural resources,

in an environmentally, friendly and balanced
manner, in compliance, with international standards,
and practices.

In fact, we have already, embarked, on sucha
development path,

by introducing, more renewables, to our energy grid,
utilizing, technological innovations,

to reduce, our carbon footprint, even further.

Suriname delegates has had, over the past, hundred
years, industrial production of bauxite,

onshore oil, gold, as well, as agricultural production.

Pagina 8 van 15

e Despite these activities, Suriname is among, the three
carbon, negative countries in the world.

e At the same time, Suriname is among, the seven
most, vulnerable countries, with respect, to the
effects, of rising sea levels.

e Mr. President,

not only, have the international pledges, for climate
financing, not materialized, in the way pledged,

but access, to the available resources, is an
enormous challenge.

Simplification, of the application, and appraisal
procedures,

must be put, in place, to have the required impact, at
a local level.

Regretfully, we also observe, that a large part, of
these funds, finds their way, in time consuming and
expensive studies, consultancies, and advisory
services.

Pagina 9 van 15

In the meantime, the situation on the ground, in the
affected regions, and countries, is deteriorating.

Often, the requested assistance, comes too late.

Mr. President, to transform, the well-being, of our
communities,

we must embrace, diversity, and work, toward social
justice, and inclusion.

That is, what responsible leaders, do.

Making sure, no one, is left out, or excluded.
We must practice, what we preach!
Mr. President, while the humanitarian, and security

situation, in the Republic of Haiti, remains of
concern,

we are pleased, to note that, also through
leadership, of the Caribbean Community,

Pagina 10 van 15

e aroad map, towards free, and fair elections, has
been initiated and, a transition government, with a
clear mandate, has been installed.

We cannot leave Haiti, and its people, alone and
behind.

Haiti fatigue, is not an option.

We urge, the international community, to
financially, and technically, supporting Haiti, on its
path forward.

Suriname will contribute, to the MSS, with security
personnel, and remains committed, to assist, in
whatever, way we can.

We urge, and call, for a more effective, coordinated
and coherence approach,

and the transparent sharing, of information,
regarding the different initiatives, to serve more
effectively, the objectives,

Pagina 11 van 15

of facilitating peace, security, and prosperity in Haiti,
and the Haitian People.

Leaving no one behind, should also include, lifting
the longstanding, economic embargo, against Cuba
and its people.

Adopting, the Pact of the Future, represents an
opportunity, to redirect, a new path, for humanity,

to address, current challenges, while laying the

groundwork, for sustainable solutions.

We need to foster, collaboration, and strengthen
partnerships,

to address, the long-term global issues, as climate
change, social inequality,

and access, to affordable health care, and quality
education for all.

Pagina 12 van 15

Small nations, need the support, for digital
transformation,

providing the tools, and capacity-building initiatives,
needed, to fully integrate, into the global, digital
economy.

We must, Mr. President, utilize technology, ina
positive, and constructive manner, to facilitate,
financial inclusion for all,

access to general education, and skills training, but
also, to tele-medicine and treatment,

as well, as instant Government services.

Mr. President, 2024 marks, the fifth time, for me, to
address, the General Assembly.

In 2020, | made, my maiden address virtually,
through the optimal use, of modern technology.

At that time, | remarked, that multilateralism, came
under attack, on several occasions.

Pagina 13 van 15

e And four years onwards, we still have, a long way to
go.

e We must work, collectively, and with a sense, of
urgency, and positive attitude,

# Towards, a renewed commitment, to a multilateral
framework, that is more inclusive, more equitable,
more accountable,

e@ with the ultimate goal, to create a better, safer, and
more productive planet, for our people now, and in
the future.

e In conclusion, Mr. President, the theme, “Leave no
one behind”, is a call to action, but is also, a
challenge.

e For smaller countries, like Suriname, the global
system, often continues exclusion, sometimes in
new version and style.

Pagina 14 van 15

As we continue, our renewed commitment, to
building,

a more just, inclusive, and equitable international
system, where accountability is important.

Together, we must ensure, that no nation, no
community, and no individual, no women and
no children is excluded, or left behind,

from the promise, of peace, prosperity and dignity.

Let’s live up, to the spirit, of “one for all, and all for

”

one .

| thank you, may God bless you!

Pagina 15 van 15

