9/25/24, 10:13 AM Npesugextu Toynknctou | Xa6apxo

NIPE3MQEHTM Q
4YYMXYPMM TOUMKUCTOH

xX Town aA

Pam3xon ‘TMewson

TounKucTOH -
qapnati = MuanaT

lpesvgent XykyMaT

Acoci / Pyinopxo / XaGapxo /

Speech of the President of the Republic of
Tajikistan at the General Debates of the
79th Session of the United Nations General
Assembly

24.09.2024 23.44 United States

Honorable President,

Excellency Secretary General,
Distinguished delegates,

| at the onset extend warm words of congratulation to His Excellency Mr.
Philémon Yang on his election as the President of the 79th Session of the
United Nations General Assembly.

https://www.president.tj/event/news/47788

Dactroxu
w4pova

1/6
9/25/24, 10:13 AM Npesugextu Toynknctou | Xa6apxo

My heartfelt thanks also go out to His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis in
recognition of his fruitful engagement as the Presdient of the 78th
Session of the UN GA.

Di

stinguished delegates,
Today the world is facing up to susceptible and intricate situations.

The controversial geopolitical processes, rapid weaponization, escalation
of the “cold war’, armed conflicts, aftermath of climate change and other
global jeopardies and threats will undoubtedly give rise to the long-term
negative consequences.

In this context, it is critical more than ever that we consolidate join
efforts of the international community to protect security, maintain
stability and ensure sustainable development.

Obviously, we can ensure lasting peace, harmonious life of mankind and
prosperity of countries primarily on the basis of mutual understanding
and constructive cooperation.

We ought to be united to achieve these objectives, bring all wars and
conflicts to an end, as well as implement our peaceful goals.

It is high time now to take bold and effective steps forward to strengthen
the key role of the United Nations in resolving conflicts and restoring
peace and stability across the planet.

| in this regard would like to propose to adopt a special UN Genera
Assembly Resolution declaring “The Decade of Promotion of Peace for
Future Generations”.

As | have stated time and again, Tajikistan always advocates the solution
of all conflicts only through political and diplomatic means.

At the same time, | would like to emphasize that the Republic of
Tajikistan continues an uninterrupted, unwavering support of an
implementation of the 2030 Agenda to achieve sustainable development
goals.

It is worth noting, that the principal message of this Agenda is also
reflected in Tajikistan National Development Strategy 2030, and
continued efforts are being taken to achieve its set goals.

Nevertheless, the existence of a wide range of difficulties hinder the
timely financing of sustainable development.

Challenges include security turmoil, economic and financial crises,
unprecedented warming due to climate change and loss of biodiversity, as
well as an outbreak of contagious diseases.

na political declaration recently adopted by the General Assembly,
Member States have admitted that “the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals is in threat”.

According to the UN Secretary General's report, the international
community will be capable to achieve only 17% of the Sustainable
Development Goals by 2030.

We are witnessing the setbacks in results achieved within the Sustainable
Development Goals in many developing countries.

n view of this, we need to intensify our efforts to implement the 2030
Agenda in a timely manner and pay particular attention to the financing

https://www.president.tj/event/news/47788 2/6
9/25/24, 10:13 AM

Npesugextu Toynknctou | Xa6apxo

for sustainable development.

We do also believe that the Fourth International Conference on Financing
for Development (FfD4), scheduled to be held in Spain in July 2025 as per
the UN General Assembly Resolution, will play a crucial role in exploring
new approaches to remove barriers to financing for development.

Necessarily, the activities of the international financial and economic
system should meet the needs of developing countries so that it can
facilitate the timely counterresponse of member states to modern threats
and challenges.

In that context, in order to implement the goals and programmes
outlined, we believe it is important to continue financing countries in
need by international financial institutions, especially through the
International Development Association.

Digital technologies and artificial intelligence pave the suitable ways for
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.

ajikistan is taking effective and necessary measures for the gradual
transition to digitalization system by adopting the national strategy and
relevant conceptual legal acts.

S

this respect, | propose to the General Assembly to adopt at its
upcoming session a Special Resolution on the RAole of Artificial
elligence in Creating New Opportunities for Socio-Economic
Development and Acceleration of the SDG achievement in Central Asia.

5

n

Tajikistan recognizes the importance of the “Summit of the Future” held
he framework of the current session of the UN General Assembly.

The intergovernmental document - “The Pact for the Future” adopted
during the Summit, plays a key role in ensuring peace, security and
sustainable development, and we welcome the willingness of the
international community to implement this Pact.

his Pact was adopted at a time when millions of civilians are exposed to
security risks and dangers in different regions around the world.

We reckon that the international community must take joint and effective
actions to withstand the threats of terrorism and extremism, radicalism,
cybercrime, trafficking in narcotics and weapons smuggling, and other
manifestations of transnational crime.

Furthermore, the rise of Islamophobia, as well as the trend of practicing
“double standard” policy in international relations in recent years has
become a matter of concern.

Our country, constantly carries out joint actions in cooperation with the
United Nations and its specialized agencies, as well as other international
partners to counter security threats and challenges.

Consequently, Tajikistan and the State of Kuwait in cooperation with the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), will hold the next
High-level Conference in the framework of the “Dushanbe Process on
Counter-Terrorism” in Kuwait this November.

We believe, that this platform will mainly focus on the subjects related to
the persistence of inclusive security and stability, and contribute to the
continuation of an extended and trustful dialogue, as well as the
exchange of helpful experience and ideas.

https://www.president.tj/event/news/47788

3/6
9/25/24, 10:13 AM

Npesugextu Toynknctou | Xa6apxo

Ladies and gentlemen,

On security matters, | would like to emphasize that the Palestinian crisis
remains a matter of deep concern to our country.

Today's tragic situation in that region once again proves that there is no
military solution to the Palestinian case.

Tajikistan believes, that an ultimate and tangible solution to this conflict
is possible only through the implementation of the United Nations
resolutions on recognition of an Independent State of Palestine based on
1967 borders.

We hope, that conflicting parties will take actions for a ceasefire deal and
arrange the peace negotiations, and the international community will
take effective steps to restore the lasting stability in Palestine.

Moreover, we uphold the establishment of enduring peace and stability,
as well as economic and social development in neighbouring Afghanistan.

To this end, Tajikistan is always ready to accord its assistance in the
revival and development of wide range of sectors of peaceful life in
Afghanistan.

Subsequently, | repeatedly call on the international community to spare
no effort to help the long-suffering people of Afghanistan, including
regions affected by natural disasters, to prevent a humanitarian crisis in
this country.

Honorable delegates,
It has been more than a year since the UN Water Conference 2023.

According to the reports of relevant United Nations agencies, progress in
water supply and sanitation, despite some improvements, does not meet
our expectations.

As a result, Tajikistan, as a champion country, actively cooperates with all
stakeholders to implement the commitments stemming from the “Water
Action Agenda’ of the United Nations Water Conference - 2023.

Successful accomplishment of these and other water-related
commitments and goals will depend on effective multi-stakeholder
partnerships that ensure integrated and systematic, coherent approaches.

In this regard, it is important for us to take advantage of the Dushanbe
Water Process platform to monitor the outcomes of the United Nations
Water Conference - 2023.

We believe, that the Dushanbe Water Process will play a pivotal role as a
platform for a broad inclusive dialogue of stakeholders for
comprehensive preparation for the United Nations Water Conference in
Dushanbe in 2028.

Your Excellencies,
Distinguished participants,

In the backdrop of climate change impacts, the international community
needs to work on collective approaches and initiatives in the proper use
of natural resources and the relentless activities of various fields of
human life.

https://www.president.tj/event/news/47788

4I6
9/25/24, 10:13 AM

Npesugextu Toynknctou | Xa6apxo

In recent years, the natural disasters along with a series of droughts
cause enormous damage to the agriculture, environment and economies
of developing countries in general.

Being 93% of its territory covered by mountains, Tajikistan is also
vulnerable to climate change due to the frequent occurrence of natural
disasters.

Natural disasters annually bring damage to the national economy of
Tajikistan worth hundreds of millions of dollars, and unfortunately, in
many cases they cause death toll.

Climate change is causing the accelerated melting of glaciers and the
reduction of the water volume of rivers in different parts of the world,
including Central Asia.

This process has a negative impact on real sectors of the national
economy, such as energy, industry and agriculture.

To date, more than 1,000 out of 14,000 of Tajikistan's glaciers, which are
the main source of drinking water in the region, have completely melted,
and the pace of their melting is dramatically increasing.

This is despite the fact that precipitation and glaciers of Tajikistan make
up to 60% of the source of water resources in Central Asia.

Meanwhile, the UN General Assembly's declaration of 2025 as the
“International Year of Glaciers’ Preservation” at the initiative of Tajikistan
provides a suitable basis for developing cooperation among stakeholders.

Pursuant to this UNGA Resolution, March 21 was declared as the “World
Glaciers’ Day’, and an International Trust Fund to promote the Glaciers
Preservation was established under the auspices of the UN Secretary-
General.

Congruently, the first High-Level International Conference on the Glaciers
will be hosted in Dushanbe, Tajikistan next year.

Taking this opportunity, we call on partner countries and organizations to
actively participate and contribute to the arrangement of this Conference.

We believe, that this important international conference which is
scheduled to be held in cooperation with UNESCO and the World
Meteorological Organization, will play an effective role in assessing the
global glacier problems and exploring specific approaches for their
solutions.

Alongside with this, we invite all partners to financially contribute to the
“International Glaciers’ Trust Fund”.

It is worth highlighting, that to further advance the glaciers’ preservation
agenda, Tajikistan, together with France, has put forward another
initiative to declare 2025-2034 the Decade of Action for Cryospheric
Sciences.

Our country has adopted the National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate
Change 2030 based on its international obligations, including provisions
of aris Agreement.

Evidently, one of the ways to successfully mitigate the problems related
to climate change is the development of "green economy’, which in turn
calls for development of “green energy”.

https://www.president.tj/event/news/47788

5/6
9/25/24, 10:13 AM

Npesugextu Toynknctou | Xa6apxo

Considering the importance of this reality, our country has approved and
currently implementing the Green Economy Development Strategy for
2023-2037.

We currently produce 98% of our electricity from the country’s
hydropower resources, and we are ranked the sixth in the world in terms
of the share of “green energy” produced from renewable sources.

The goal of the implementation of our plans in this direction is to turn
Tajikistan into a “green country" by 2037.

Today, finding solutions to the daily issues of adaptation to climate
change and reducing the severity of its negative consequences is
considered one of the top priorities for the international community.

We hope that developed countries, the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, influential international financial institutions and other
international and regional multilateral entitities will further continue to
pay serious attention to these pressing issues.

We are convinced, that the international community succeeds to achieve
its common goals and objectives through the development of trustful
dialogue, mutual understanding and constructive cooperation.

| thank you for your attention.

https://www.president.tj/event/news/47788

6/6
