Check against delivery

STATEMENT BY RT. HON. KASSIM MAJALIWA MAJALIWA (MB), PRIME
MINISTER OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA AT THE GENERAL
DEBATE OF THE SEVENTY-NINTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY (UNGA79), NEW YORK
ON 2774 SEPTEMBER 2024

e Your Excellency, Philemon Yang, President of the 79'" Session of the UN
General Assembly;

e Your Excellency Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations;

e Excellencies Heads of State and Government;

e Ladies and Gentlemen.

e Good morning/ afternoon,

Mr. President,

| stand before this august Assembly to deliver a message of hope and peace to the people
of the world. In doing so, | wish to convey warm and fraternal greetings from the President
and people of the United Republic of Tanzania. Her Excellency Dr. Samia Suluhu Hassan,
President of the United Republic of Tanzania wishes this assembly every success in its
important deliberations.

| would also like to join the previous speakers in commending you, Mr. President, for the
excellent manner you are steering the work of the Assembly. Tanzania endorses and
support the theme chosen for this session, that is: “Leaving no one behind: acting
together for the advancement of peace, sustainable development, and human
dignity for present and future generations.” This theme aligns well with the UN Charter
and builds on the efforts of your predecessor, His Excellency Dennis Francis, whose
remarkable leadership is truly appreciated. Tanzania recognizes and thank the Secretary-
General for his great work and the important message he shared with us at the opening of
this general debate.

Mr. President,

The participation in the Seventy-Ninth General Assembly has been a unique opportunity
for us to share perspectives regarding the pledges and commitments made for addressing
global challenges such as pandemics, extreme poverty, climate change and conflicts. |

would like to share some of Tanzania’s perspectives as follows:
Sustainable Development: Tanzania’s Path to Inclusive Growth

Mr. President,

The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a beacon of hope in addressing global
challenges. Tanzania’s journey towards sustainable development reflects that of many
nations, facing significant challenges from the detrimental impacts of COVID-19 on health
and economic systems. Climate change, marked by extreme weather patterns like
torrential rains and droughts, has deteriorated health issues and strained infrastructure.
We are concerned about the slow pace in attaining these goals, whereby as of 2023, only
17 percent of targets were on track, with over a one third regressing or stalling. Urgent
actions and global solidarity are needed to overcome barriers such as economic
imbalances, climate change, conflicts, and gender inequality.

Mr. President,

Our commitments towards the realization of SDGs, is focused on sustainable economic
growth through strategic investments in agriculture, aquaculture, livestock, fisheries,
infrastructure development, energy and digital technology. Our goal is to improve food
security, reduce poverty, ensure job creation and drive inclusive economic growth. There
are many success stories in Tanzania emanating from this investment, such as the
empowerment of youth through the Building Better Tomorrow (BBT) agriculture initiative in
Mainland Tanzania, and empowerment of local women in Zanzibar through seaweed

farming.

On the other hand, Tanzania implements policies to ensure access to quality healthcare
and education for all citizens, including the Universal Health Insurance act and Free Basic
Education. The Government also invests in vocational training and STEM education to
prepare youth for the job market and digital economy.
Defending Human Dignity, Inclusivity and Equity
Mr. President,
For decades, Tanzania’s Foreign policy has prioritized respect for human dignity.
Addressing this Assembly on 14 December 1961, Mwalimu Julius Kambarage Nyerere,
the then Prime Minister of Tanganyika stated that:

“The basis of our actions, internal and external, will be an attempt, an honest attempt,

to honour the dignity of man.”

Mr. President,

Tanzania has maintained this pledge by leading the fight against colonialism and racism.
In this regard, Tanzania hosted the OAU Liberation Committee, supporting freedom
fighters in their struggles for independence. Despite gaining political liberation, many
countries still face economic sanctions and inhumane condition which hinders the
achievement of genuine development. Thus, we call for the realization of the right to self-
determination of all people under colonial occupation and lifting of economic sanctions
imposed against them. This assembly must continue to more boldly call for the lifting of
economic sanctions placed against the people of Cuba and other countries, so to allow the
people of these countries to realize their basic rights, including the right to development.

Mr. President,

Global humanitarian crises due to war, conflict and natural disaster requires unrestricted
access to humanitarian aid, fair treatment of victims, accountability to atrocities, and the
United Nations’ commitment to upholding human dignity for a peaceful world. Tanzania
believes that every individual deserves to live in dignity, freedom, and security, to reach
their full potential. The United Nations must not remain indifferent in these situations, as
doing so would only undermine its legitimacy.
Peace and Security

Mr. President,

Security is indivisible and peace is critical for achieving development. In the face of global
health threats, characterized by pandemics such a Covid 19 and currently M-Pox, ever
intensifying geopolitical tensions and the growing impacts of climate change, the saying
that no one is safe until everyone is safe truly gathers meaning. It is imperative that we
should invest more in peace, foster unity and rebuild trust. In this regard, Tanzania
welcomes the adoption of General Assembly resolution 78/312, which proclaims July 7"
as World Kiswahili Language Day. Kiswahili, a language spoken by over 200 million
people in all continents of the world, is an important tool for advancing peace, unity and
cultural diversity. While Tanzania and other Kiswahili speaking countries look forward to
commemorating this day in 2025 and beyond, we also call on this Assembly to explore the
possibility of recognizing it as the 7" official language of our esteemed Organization. The
African Union, the East African Community and the Southern African Development
Community have already led the way.

In recognition of this requirement, Tanzania has for several decades participated in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, and mediation efforts. Tanzania has and continues to
contribute towards world peace through its membership in the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council. This contribution is also
evident through its leadership in regional arrangements, such as the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region of Africa and currently the chairing of the Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security of the Southern African Development Community. | wish to
reassure this august assembly that Tanzania’s commitment towards peace will not
weaken. Tanzania will continue to diligently dispense the obligations emanating from the
Charter of the United Nations.
Climate Change

Mr. President,

Tanzania, like many other developing countries, is highly vulnerable to droughts, floods,
desertification and effects of sea level rise. It is estimated that the sea level will rise by 41
cm by 2080. While the sea level rise cannot be reversed, Tanzania is taking several
adaptation and mitigation measures, including the restoration and plantation of
mangroves, enhancement of coastal infrastructure, and promotion of eco-tourism and
aquaculture. It is imperative therefore that we must invest more in climate finance to help
recover economies already suffering from these effects and to enhance access to funding
for loss and damage in the hardest-hit countries.

Embracing Clean Energy
Mr. President,
As we prepare for COP 29 in Baku, Azerbaijan, it is worth remembering that globally, an
estimated 2.4 billion people are still using polluting fuels for cooking. This contributes to
health problems, food insecurity, gender inequality, and environmental damage, including
millions of premature deaths, limited access to education and employment for women and
children, and increased greenhouse gas emissions and deforestation. Achieving universal
clean cooking access in Africa by 2030 would require an estimated amount of 4 billion U.S
Dollar annually, a small fraction of global energy spending.

Mr. President,

In response to this alarming situation, Tanzania is championing a Clean Cooking Agenda,
which essentially contributes to several SDGs, including goal number 7, focusing on
ensuring access to affordable and sustainable energy for all. Mr. President, | would like
to inform this august assembly that Tanzania will host the Africa Energy Summit in
January 2025, co-organized with the World Bank and the African Development Bank. The
summit aims to accelerate the implementation of the World Bank Group and the African
Development Bank Group commitment to provide electricity access to 300 million people
in Africa by 2030. We look forward to working together with all partners to unlock energy
potential and build a brighter, more resilient future for Africa.
Delivering on Democracy

Mr. President,

In November this year, Tanzania will hold local government elections, followed by
presidential and parliamentary elections in October next year. As we prepare for these
electoral events, | wish to assure this assembly that democracy, human rights and the rule
of law will be upheld in line with President Samia’s vision as captured in the 4Rs
philosophy, namely: reconciliation, resilience, reforms, and rebuilding. Since the
announcement of the 4R principles in 2021, the Government of Tanzania has continued to
foster harmony and promote unity across political, religious, and ethnic divides. In
implementation of the 4R, the government has also undertaken several monumental
reforms that seek to address shortfalls within the criminal justice system, allow for effective
political processes and enhance the enjoyment of human rights.

Mr. President,

Reforms are crucial for countries and international organizations to stay relevant, for
greater inclusiveness, transparency, and accountability, especially in multilateral bodies
like the UN Security Council and Bretton Woods Institutions. Tanzania remains committed
to rebuilding its economy and society, focusing on inclusivity and empowering its citizens

for a stronger future.

Conclusion
Mr. President,
Excellencies and Distinguished Delegates,
In conclusion, Tanzania urges all the world leaders to unite against international threats
that undermine unity, peace, and human dignity. We are obliged to work towards the goal
stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations of sparing succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. We must stop wars and suffering that cause death and wanton suffering to

innocent civilians, including women and children.

Let us leverage innovation, adopt inclusive policies, and strengthen international
cooperation in accelerating the implementation of SDGs. Together, let us build
partnerships that transcend borders, ensuring no one is left behind.
Let us undertake the necessary reforms to make our multilateral institutions fit for purpose.
Let us rebuild trust and reconcile our differences. Let us cooperate to build resilience of
our institutions and people. We can achieve the future we want, if we commit to rebuilding
and restoring what has been damaged by our past actions. As we look to the future, let us
honour the commitments made in various international fora. Together, let us embrace this

moment with optimism and a shared dedication to inclusivity.

| THANK YOU FOR YOUR KIND ATTENTION.
