1

Statement by H.E. Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine,
at UN GA General Debate

New York, 25 September 2024

Dear leaders,

Your excellencies,

Today, | want to tell you about a day that has already passed, anda
day that must never come.

On the night of March 4th, 2022, | received one of the most terrifying
reports since the beginning of a full-scale Russian invasion against our
nation.

The report was about Russiantanks firing directly at the buildings of our
Ukrainian nuclear power plant. The Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant. The
largest one in Europe. Six nuclear reactors. The Russian army stormed this
facility just as brutally as any other during this war. Without thinking about the
consequences. Possibly disastrous. This was one of the most horrifying
moments of the war, when no one could know how Russian strikes on the
nuclear facility would end, and everyone in Ukraine was reminded of what
Chernobyl means.

Now, the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant remains occupied by
Russian forces. Unfortunately. And it’s at risk of a nuclear incident. This is
the major source of radiation danger in Europe, possibly in the world.

That’s why, in the Peace Formula | presented, the first point is about
nuclear safety.

In Ukraine, we know exactly WHAT we’re dealing with. And! want to
thank you — the General Assembly members — for adopting a resolution in
July this year on the safety of nuclear facilities in Ukraine. Most in the world
understand — what's at stake. The General Assembly demanded that Russia
return control of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant to Ukraine. Only then
real nuclear security will return to Europe and the world.

And now about the day that must never come.

Since Russia can’t defeat our people’s resistance on the battlefield,
Putin is looking for other ways to break the Ukrainian spirit. One of his
methods is targeting our energy infrastructure. These are deliberate Russian
attacks on our power plants, and the entire energy grid. As of today, Russia
has destroyed all our thermal power plants and a large part of our
hydroelectric capacity. This is how Putin is preparing for winter — hoping
to torment millions of Ukrainians...Ordinary families — women, children...
Ordinary towns and villages. Putin wants to leave them in the dark and cold
this winter, forcing Ukraine to suffer and surrender. Just imagine YOUR
country with 80 percent of its energy system gone — with sucha
destroyed part of the system. WHAT kind of life would that be?
2

Recently, | received yet another alarming report from our intelligence.

Now, Putin does seem to be planning attacks on our nuclear
power plants and their infrastructure, aiming to disconnect the plants
from the power grid. With the help of satellites — by the way, satellites of
other countries, — Russia is getting images and detailed information about the
infrastructure of our nuclear power plants.

But WHAT does this really threaten?

Any missile or drone strike, any critical incident in the energy system,
could lead to a nuclear disaster. A day like that must NEVER come. And
Moscow needs to understand this. And this depends, in part, on YOUR
determination to put pressure on the aggressor. These are nuclear power
plants! They must be safe.

Ladies and gentlemen!

Two years ago, in the fall of 2022, | proposed a comprehensive strategy
to end the war — and to ensure security. | presented the Peace Formula ata
highly inclusive political platform for world leaders — the G20 summit in
Indonesia — representing billions of citizens from all parts of the globe.

And it’s important for us that all these people can understand us —
understand that Ukraine wants to end this war MORE than anyone.

War always poses a threat to many. You all see in the media and read
in reports what is happening in Ukraine because of Russia’s war - it’s
something, many are imagining happening to themselves. And, yes, the
smoke from fires in war-torn cities can reach other countries. And if, God
forbid, Russia causes a nuclear disaster at one of our nuclear power plants,
radiation won't respect state borders, and unfortunately, various nations could
feel the devastating effects. Many are concerned, but the deepest
understanding of war is always found in the home it destroys.

It is the Ukrainian people who feel the full pain of this war. It’s Ukrainian
children who are learning to distinguish the sounds of different types of
artillery and drones because of Russia’s war. It’s our people who are
Forcefully separated by occupation because Putin decided he could do
whatever he wants. It’s our heroic soldiers who are giving their lives to defend
our country from invaders trying to steal our land. That’s why we Say,
rightfully so — there can be NO just peace without Ukraine.

| thank every leader, every country that supports us in this, that
understands us — that sees how Russia, a country more than twenty times
larger than Ukraine in territory, still wants even MORE land — which is
insane -— and is seizing it, day by day, while wanting to destroy its neighbor.
And Russia found very special buddies for that —- North Korea and Iran, a
telling choice of friends. Now every neighbor of Russia in Europe and Central
Asia feels that the war could come to them as well, and just think - WHAT
kind of losses that would mean for the world.

| thank nearly one hundred nations and international organizations that
have supported the Peace Formula. It’s truly a global community — Africa,
3

Asia, Europe, Latin America, North America, the Pacific region — all united by
the Peace Formula.

And I’m glad that the first Peace Summit was so reminding of the
UN General Assembly — everyone was equal. All nations that participated
in the Peace Summit — large and small — NO veto right, NO blocking
authority. Those that have been independent for ages, and those that have
only recently gained independence. Those that have gone through wars
themselves, and those accustomed to peace. All were equal — THAT is what
Russia hates the most and cannotcontrol, that’s why Russia says the Peace
Formula doesn’t suit it.

Here at the UN, I’ve already met with leaders from India and
Guatemala, Japan and Italy, Turkiye and Finland, Canada and Paraguay,
Slovenia and Germany. And my meetings will continue. These are different
parts of the world and various political ways of life, but they share the same
understanding — peace is needed, and it must be a real, just peace.

Unfortunately, at the UN, it’s impossible to truly and fairly resolve
matters of war and peace because too much depends in the Security Council
on the veto power. When the aggressor exercises veto power, the UN is
powerless to stop the war. But the Peace Formula can — once again,
there is NO veto power in it. That’s why it’s the best opportunity for peace —
everyone is equal, and it’s effective and comprehensive.

When some propose alternatives, half-hearted settlement plans — so-
called 'sets of principles' — it NOT only ignores the interests and suffering of
Ukrainians, who are affected by the war the most, it NOT only ignores reality,
but also gives Putin the political space to continue the war and pressure the
world to bring more nations under control. Any parallel or alternative attempts
to seek peace are, in fact, efforts to achieve a lull instead of an end to the
war, as a globalinitiative — the Peace Formula — has already existed for two
years. Maybe someone wants a Nobel Prize for their political biography
for frozen truce instead of real peace, but the only prizes Putin will give
you in return are more suffering and disasters.

We must restore nuclear safety.

Energy must stop being used as a weapon.

We must ensure food security.

We need to bring home all our captured soldiers and civilians forcibly
deported to Russia.

We must uphold the UN Charter and guarantee our right — Ukraine’s
right — to territorial integrity and sovereignty, just as we do for any other
nation.

We need to withdraw the Russian occupying forces, which will bring an
end to the hostilities in Ukraine.

We must hold those responsible for war crimes accountable.

We need to preventecocide and stop the destruction of nature caused
by the war.
4

We must not allow a second or third phase of this Russian invasion.

And we need to make it clear — the war is over.

This is the Peace Formula.

WHAT part of this could be unacceptable to anyone who upholds the
UN Charter?

If someone in the world seeks alternatives to any of these points
or tries to ignore any of them, it likely means they themselves want to
do apart of what Putin is doing — the point they ignore reveals the
desire they are
hiding.

And when the Chinese-Brazilian duo tries to grow into a choir of voices
— with someone in Europe, with someone in Africa, saying something
alternative to a full and just peace, the question arises — WHAT is the true
interest?

Everyone must understand — you won't boost your power at Ukraine’s
expense.

The world has already been through colonial wars and conspiracies of
great powers at the expense of those who are smaller. Every country —
including China, Brazil, European nations, African nations, and Middle East —
all understand WHY this mustremain in the past. And Ukrainians will never
accept why anyone in the world believes that such a brutal colonial
past, which suits no onetoday, can be imposed on Ukraine now instead
of anormal, peaceful life.

| want peace for my people — real and just peace.

And I’m asking for your support — from all nations of the world. We do
NOT divide the world.

| ask the same of you — do NOT divide the world. Be UNITED Nations,
and that will bring peace.

Thank you.

Cnasa Yxpaini!
