Office of the Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

4* Floor, Administrative Centre, Bay Street, Kingstowne Tel: (784) 456-1703 ¢ Fax: (784) 457-2152 © pmosvg@gov.vc

ADDRESS
to the

79th Session of the United Nations General Assembly

HE. Hon. Dr. Ralph E. Gonsalves

Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

Friday, September 27", 2024
United Nations
New York

Check against delivery

O|Page
THE TRAVAILS OF SMALL ISLAND DEVELOPING STATES
BY

DR. THE HON. RALPH E. GONSALVES
PRIME MINISTER OF
ST. VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES

Mr. President, Your Excellencies,

Despite a quarter century of analysis, advocacy, and prescriptions
set forth by the leaders of Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and
international institutions charged with advancing the interest of
SIDS, our travails are enduring in a global community largely
disinterested in our well-being and that of small states generally. We
in SIDS remain unequally yoked in a global community motivated by
the baser instincts of the untrammeled power of money, ideology,

guns, lethal weaponry, territorial and global dominance.

To be sure, the SIDS have made incremental advances in the global
community and in the architecture of international relations;

nevertheless, for us in SIDS it has been a situation akin to going up

1|Page
a down escalator in which the down escalator is moving at a faster
pace than the upward baby steps. Frequently, it appears as though
much of the powerful would wish that SIDS did not exist. But here
we are stubborn as the heavens; we are not going anywhere despite
our massive vulnerabilities. Our people have a permanence in this
world even if some of our lands wash away; we have a voice, and we

will continue to use it.

We demand as of right especial support from the international
community to address efficaciously the unique social, economic, and
environmental vulnerabilities of SIDS, in the interest of the nearly 70
million people who permanently occupy the seascape and landscape
of SIDS, and in the interest, too, of all the other eight billion or so
persons who inhabit Mother Earth. Small Island Exceptionalism
ought to be a category embedded formally in international law and

accorded most favorable treatment.

Rather than securing a most favourable treatment, the SIDS are
required to fight to maintain even the special considerations which

Providence or serendipity has bestowed upon them. A case in point

2|Page
is the attempt, currently, by the International Development
Association (IDA) to pit the most vulnerable — the SIDS — against
the poorest countries in its quest to tighten the terms under which
qualifying SIDS, of a particular income level, such as St. Vincent and
the Grenadines, obtain soft-loans through the World Bank—IDA

nexus. [

] In any event, why is the World Bank persisting
with the single, anachronistic and ill-designed metric of average per
capita income in respect of vulnerable SIDS, in the age of the
Anthropocene, as against a more comprehensive and sensible

measure of a Multi-dimensional Vulnerability Index?

Your Excellencies, the unvarnished truth is that the developed
countries have not kept their promises to the SIDS, except the most

marginal ones.

Importantly, the countries of the developed world, the major historic,

and contemporary emitters of greenhouse gases, have failed and/or

3|Page
refused to keep their solemn commitments of restricting the global
temperature at below 1.5 degrees Celsius, above pre-industrial levels.
Unless there are drastic alterations in the patterns of consumption,
production, life, and living in developed, and large emerging
economies, our planet is inexorably on a path to a proverbial hell in
a hand-basket. In the process, countries of an island or seaboard
civilisation are likely to be inundated by raging seas and enveloped

in searing heat.

On the matter of the financing of climate change, the developed
countries, which have the means and the major historic
responsibility to contain this existential threat, have been

parsimonious and less than responsible, in practice.

Even today, the cynicism and double-speak of several major
developed countries is breathtaking in response to the quest of most
of the global community to transform the international financial
institutions as fit-for-purpose in today’s world, and for responsible,
reasonable alterations in the actual modalities of climate change

financing. High representatives of most of these developed countries

4|Page
pay lip-service, in general, to the innovative Bridgetown III proposals,
endorsed by the Caribbean Community, only to nit-pick and delay,
in the particular, on the essentials. Brazenly, when these developed
countries make a marginal concession, they trumpet it as a major

advance so as to send the proverbial fool a little further.

The Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS (ABAS), adopted earlier
this year, encompasses an action-oriented framework for the way
forward. The recently adopted “Pact for the Future” by the UNGA

provides a wider and promising buttress.

In our advocacy for the 39 SIDS, we embrace, too, the cause of the
Least Developed Countries, and the Landlocked Developing

Countries — all 92 vulnerable countries in the UN System.

Your Excellencies, growing material dissatisfaction grips increasingly

large numbers of people in both the metropoles and the hinterlands

in this highly inter-connected world.

5|Page
Noticeably, the ceremony of innocence is drowned, things are falling
apart, the centres cannot hold, and the cascading effects are ripping
the world asunder; the best of all lack conviction and the worst are
full of passionate intensity. Creative resistance and reconstruction
are the banners under which ordinary men and women across the
globe are draping themselves. Sadly, in the North Atlantic countries
there is growing and dangerous constituency for an illiberal, even a
neo-fascist, option of looking forward to an illusory past in search of
making again their countries unalloyed, mythical paradises of
unrivaled dominance; they are looking forward to a past that never

was.

At the same time, even a modest, middling social democracy is on the
retreat because this old political shell of the post-1945 global order
can barely contain the erupting contradictions within, and outside,
it. A search for new modalities is emerging but not yet fully formed,
in part because the old order is unprepared to relinquish, cede, or
share power, even as it realizes that it cannot continue to rule in the
old way; but the new is yet to be born, and the forces of change lack

a sufficiency of strength to deliver satisfactory alterations.

6|Page
Your Excellencies, the war in Ukraine, the genocide in Gaza, the
conflicts in the Yemen, Sudan, and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the threats across the Taiwan Strait, an empire’s designs on
revolutionary Cuba and Venezuela, the violence and more in Haiti,
and such like disruptions of the peace globally, all have specific
origins and contexts. But they are all reflective, too, of a failure of
multilateralism, a hamstrung United Nations framework, and a
derogation from the fundamental precepts of the Charter of the
United Nations. Large, powerful nations, singly, or in allied
combinations, have a propensity to seek dominance. In this milieu,
opportunistic or servile alliances emerge or persist as the particular
circumstances admit. It all degenerates into a Manichean politics of

the mad-house; hypocrisy, disinformation, and folly reign supreme.

Your Excellencies, in this context, arises the trope of the neo-liberal

global order that the principal contradiction in today’s global political

economy is between democracy and autocracy.

7|Page
Still, all the self-serving shibboleths and gloss of this fictional
construct will not wash away the unrepentant sins of the past or the
cruel impositions of the present. The blinding truth is that the central
contradiction in today’s political economy is not between democracy
and autocracy. The main contradiction, has been and still is today,
that which revolves around the fundamental material questions of
“who gets what, when, where, and how’; it is centrally about the
struggle or competition for ownership, control, and distribution of
material resources which constitute the basis for regional or global

hegemony. [

] Everywhere, more and more, the poor, the
hungry, the marginalized, the disadvantaged are clamouring, and
organizing, for a different and better future, not an unacceptable
past, not a present without possibilities for upliftment; but for a

future beyond unbounded elements.

Your Excellencies, sadly, in our region, we have been experiencing
the lived reality that the imperial ghost of Monroe still stalks the

marbled halls of the citadels of a neighboring great country of

8| Page
extraordinary possibilities to the detriment of countries in Latin
America and the Caribbean. No country in our hemisphere can
reasonably be considered a security or other threat to this great
nation. Yet, St. Vincent and the Grenadines and other Caribbean
countries have been damaged collaterally, and directly, in significant
material ways, by the weaponizing of the financial system and the
unjust, unilateral, coercive sanctions against Venezuela and Cuba,
which are a breach of international law. I am pleading with our
friends for an amicable reset of these troubled relations in the interest
of peace, mutual respect, justice, and prosperity. The international
community continues, overwhelmingly, and rightly, to demand the
end of the unilateral sanctions, the embargos, and unfair
declarations about state sponsorship of terrorism, and more, made

against Cuba.

Your Excellencies, on July 1, 2024, the Category 4 Hurricane Beryl
battered St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Grenada, and Jamaica.
Since the dawn of the 21st century this is the 12t» significant natural
disaster to have struck my country, excluding the volcanic eruptions

of 2021. Hurricane Beryl has adversely affected one-fifth of our

9|Page
population and has caused economic damage amounting to one-third
of our country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The relief, recovery,
and reconstruction processes are underway. On behalf of the
government and people of St. Vincent and the Grenadines, I thank
all countries and organisations, including the United Nations, that
have come to our aid in the immediate aftermath of the hurricane.
Unfortunately, for the recovery and rebuilding processes, we are
essentially on our own; we have had to seek significant loans to
rebuild our physical infrastructure and 5,000 houses, to provide
income support for affected persons, and to mobilise production
support for the agricultural, fishing, and tourism industries. I am
appealing to the international community, our dear friends, to assist
us not with further burdensome loans, but with requisite grants. The
recovery and reconstruction after every natural disaster increase
sharply our debt burden; countries like St. Vincent and the
Grenadines have contributed little or nothing to global warming and
man-made climate change, yet we suffer largely alone on the
frontlines. This cannot be fair; it cannot be just. Do we have to

choose DEATH or DEBT?

10| Page
Your Excellencies, the Caribbean Community, the African Union, the
Community of States of Latin America and the Caribbean, their
diasporas and all fair-minded persons globally have been insisting
that the European nations responsible for native genocide and the
enslavement of African bodies pay reparations for the consequential
legacy of underdevelopment. This issue of transformative reparatory

justice will not go away, until it is addressed appropriately. [

Your Excellencies, the suffering and pain of the Haitian people
continue to weigh heavily on the consciences of our Caribbean.
Through the efforts of the Haitian people, in tandem with the regional
and international communities, especially CARICOM, the USA,
Canada, and Kenya, a measure of progress has been made on some
fronts, but immense challenges remain in the humanitarian,
security, political, and economic spheres. The building of a free,

democratic, peaceful, and prosperous Haiti demands commitment

11|Page
and concerted action from all relevant stakeholders in pursuance of
solutions devised by Haitians and led by Haitians. Haiti fatigue is not

an option for the international community.

Your Excellencies, in our Caribbean there is a growing challenge of
violent crime involving the combustible mix of imported guns and
bullets, illegally exported marijuana, and the trafficking of cocaine
from South America. It is evident that this challenge demands much
closer operational cooperation between all the countries concerned

in the Caribbean, North America, South America and Europe.

In the Middle East, the collective punishment meted against the
Palestinians in Gaza and the continued illegal occupation of
Palestinian lands, including in the West Bank, amidst accompanying
state terror, by an Israeli regime, in total defiance of international
law, is utterly unacceptable. Surely, despite the complexities of the
problems-at-hand, this United Nations, especially the Security
Council, ought to summon the courage and the will to stop the

carnage and facilitate a lasting peace and security.

12|Page
Your Excellencies, in the Far East, the prospect of a disruption of the
tenuous peace across the Taiwan Strait is alarming. The quest for
hegemony and the denial of a people’s inalienable right to self-
determination are wrong in the east as it is the west; bullying is
objectionable in the west as it is in the east; unilateral coercive action
by a big power in the east are contrary to international law as it is

surely in the west.

St. Vincent and the Grenadines continues to urge that Taiwan be
allowed to participate fully in the specialized agencies of the United
Nations, including those pertaining to health, air and sea transport,

climate change, disaster preparedness, and global policy.

Your Excellencies, it appears that there have been recently some
positive movements in the long quest to effect a judicious and just
reform of the United Nations Security Council. It is evident to all
reasonable persons that reform of this body is long overdue. As the
Chair of the L69 Group, St Vincent and the Grenadines will continue
its advocacy for an inclusive, more accountable, effective,

representative, and relevant Security Council.

13|Page
Excellencies, we know that a better world is possible. On the United

Nations rests our hope for a better world of peace, justice, security,

and prosperity. Let us all so act in accord with our responsibilities,

obligations, and means!

Let us not desecrate our future!

Thank you!

14|Page
