Statement delivered by H.E. Mr. Yvan Gil Pinto

Minister of the People’s Power for Foreign Affairs
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

during the

“General Debate of the 79" Session of the
General Assembly of the United Nations”

New York, 25 September 2024

Distinguished Heads of Delegation,
Ministers, Ambassadors,
Mr. President,

1. Over the past few days, we have heard two narratives in this General Assembly:
one, the discourse of the oligarchs and their satellites, who seek to rule the world,
and, the other, that of the dignified peoples, who fight for their sovereignty and
independence.

2. The oligarchs, led by the government of the United States of America, are
attacking the Charter of the United Nations to destroy this Organization, from
both outside and within, and have nearly achieved this already. To this end, they
promote the involvement of private corporations, non-governmental
organizations, and other strategies that disregard the sovereignty of States. They
have called this a “rules-based order”.

3. Not satisfied with this, the oligarchies resort to political expressions that we
thought we had already overcome, such as fascism and Nazism. These political
currents of imposition and domination promote white supremacism, racism,
xenophobia and other manifestations, normalized with the support of large

international media monopolies and social networks, which are at the service of
imperialism and neo-colonialism, ultimately supporting their plans to create
tensions, fabricate conflicts and confront the peoples.

As we speak in this Assembly, bombs are being dropped on Gaza, where Israel
has murdered tens of thousands of innocent girls, boys, women and men, with
the complicity of the governments of the United States of America and the
European Union. The greatest crime of extermination and genocide since the one
committed by Hitler in the Second World War is currently being perpetrated.
Today, they intend to export their hatred and destruction to an entire region,
bombing and murdering innocent people in Lebanon and Syria, as they try to
destabilize the Islamic Republic of Iran. This is a real threat to both humanity and
world peace.

A new form of terrorism has been applied to Lebanon, with the complicity of
private companies that manage the supply chains of mass consumer technologies.
It sets a severe precedent, putting global security at risk. They also bomb civilian
infrastructure in that brotherly country, killing innocent people, just as they do in
Gaza. Israel has truly become a death machine that must be stopped immediately.

Instead of stopping the massacre and bringing those responsible to justice, those
most powerful insist on expanding the war to Europe and other parts of the
world, through military blocs such as NATO. After the defeat of Ukraine in their
Nazi adventure, they now intend to bring war and terrorism to Great Russia,
which, as history has taught us, will always be victorious.

NATO's expansion also threatens peace in South America with the installation of
military bases, with the complicity of the lackey governments of Argentina and
Ecuador.

Hate speeches stimulate and promote terrorism in its various manifestations. For
instance, from the very territory of the United States of America, attacks,
assassination attempts, destabilization and aggression against sovereign peoples,
such as Venezuela, are continuously planned. To this end, they have resorted to
the use of information and communication technologies, especially social
networks, controlled by the empire's front men, who fabricate psychological wars
aimed at exploiting feelings of hatred and destruction, without control of any sort.

9.

In addition to this, there are cyberattacks on critical infrastructure, including vital
utilities, banking, oil, and electoral systems, as happened in my country on 28
July.

Mr. President,

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

How can progress be achieved on peace and security issues when the United
States of America, whose government insists on providing a framework of
impunity for violators of international law, hijacks the body responsible for
maintaining peace and security?

From this rostrum, we reiterate our unwavering solidarity with the brotherly
Palestinian people, whom we support with determination in their just cause and
in all efforts aimed at preserving a clear political horizon, which preserves the
viability of the two-State solution, based on the pre-1967 borders. We welcome
the fact that, for the first time in the history of this Assembly, the delegation of
Palestine sits with us as another State. Today, more than ever, it is urgent that we
ensure their immediate full membership in this Organization.

We also ask, how can the decolonization agenda be concluded if we insist on
preserving a status quo that only benefits the Occupying and Administering
Powers?

Our solidarity and strong support go out to all peoples who are fighting for their
inalienable right to self-determination, to achieve full independence and to be
true masters of their destiny, their lands and their resources. It is time that the
yearnings for freedom of our sisters and brothers in Western Sahara, Puerto Rico,
New Caledonia, French Polynesia, Bonaire and so many other territories be
finally realized.

Venezuela has a profound anti-colonial vocation, inherited from our
independence struggle and the legacy of our Liberator Simon Bolivar. Therefore,
we embrace with determination all these great causes, which we have historically
assumed to be our own. We are determined to contribute to the end of colonialism
in all its forms and manifestations.

Similarly, we will continue to demand the restitution of sovereignty rights over
the Chagos Archipelago and the Malvinas Islands to their legitimate owners, the
Republic of Mauritius and the Argentine Republic. Despite the betrayal of the
ineffable Javier Milei to the Malvinas cause, the brotherly people of Argentina can

always count on Venezuela’s solidarity and full support in this just and historical
claim.

Mr. President,

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

Even today, the peoples of the world are still paying the price for the misfortunes
left by the colonialism of empires such as the United Kingdom, which committed
crimes on all continents and is now trying to erase from our memories with total
impunity.

One of them, the harmful effect of which persists still to date, is the dispossession
of Venezuela’s sovereign rights over our Guayana Esequiba. This plunder,
originated in the expansionist and violent policy exercised by the British Empire
in Venezuelan territory throughout the 19th century, which sought to impose
itself by fraudulent means in 1899, through an arbitration that was rigged betwen
the powers of the time.

On 03 December 2023, the Venezuelan people expressed themselves clearly and
decisively in a consultative referendum, granting an unavoidable mandate to the
Venezuelan State to recover the Guayana Esequiba, a territory that represents a
sacred inheritance of the struggle of our Liberators.

In that referendum, the Venezuelan people ratified the historic position of our
country of never recognizing the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) in this case, nor any decision it may adopt on this matter.

The President of Guyana has lied in this tribune on this aspect. Venezuela only
recognizes the Geneva Agreement of 1966 as the only way to reach a settlement
that restores Venezuela's rights over the territory of the Guayana Esequiba.

Today, the United States of America and Guyana are in violation of the Joint
Declaration of Argyle, threatening regional peace, security and stability, through
the military presence of extra-regional actors and the illegitimate granting of oil
concessions in an un-demarcated maritime area.

In this context, we take this opportunity to reiterate our firm commitment to the
CELAC Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace. It
is time for Guyana to demonstrate its commitment to that Proclamation, to
dialogue, mutual respect, tolerance and understanding, thus returning to the
Geneva Agreement of 1966.

Mr. President,

23.

24.

The illegal imposition of unilateral coercive measures against entire peoples by
the United States of America and the European Union represents a flagrant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and every norm of international
law. These measures constitute massive violations of human rights, including the
right to development, as well as crimes against humanity.

We reiterate our call for the complete, immediate and unconditional lifting of all
the regimes of so-called sanctions and blockades that today are enforced against
more than a third of humanity, including thirty (30) million Venezuelans. Our
solidarity with our sisters and brothers in Belarus, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Cuba, Eritrea, Iran, Nicaragua, Syria, Zimbabwe, and so many
others who suffer the effects of these criminal policies on a daily basis.

Mr. President,

25.

26.

27.

28.

Dignified peoples fighting for their sovereignty and independence have also
raised their voices in these spaces and must be heard.

Venezuela today faces the onslaught of new forms of colonialism. For several
years now, the government in Washington has been carrying out a neo-colonial
experiment that aims to destroy our democratic system, our institutions, our
sovereignty, our independence and the inalienable right of our people to self-
determination in every possible way.

This is a large-scale recolonization plan that attempts, based on a continued coup
d'état, to destroy our Republic. For its execution, all options have been and
continue to be on the table.

Since the cruel and inhuman enforcement of a ferocious economic, commercial
and financial blockade, with almost a thousand sanctions, which have cost our
nation more than 642 billion dollars in the last seven years alone; to which we
must add the losses of our State oil company, PDVSA, amounting to 232 billion
dollars; and the theft of 31 tons of gold deposited in the Bank of England, as well
as of other important assets owned by the Republic abroad; not to mention the
theft by Argentina and the Dominican Republic of aircrafts in the service of the
Venezuelan State.

29.

Venezuela is not the only one affected by this interventionism, deeply rooted in
the colonialist tradition of the Monroe Doctrine, which continues to stalk any
expression of political independence in our continent, as in the case of brave Cuba
and blessed and always free Nicaragua. They also promote coups d'état, as in
Bolivia in 2019 and 2024, and they mercilessly attack, with the support of local
oligarchies, the government of President Gustavo Petro, in Colombia, and that of
President Xiomara Castro of Honduras. Our firm support and unwavering
solidarity with them as well.

Mr. President,

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

On 28 July, as is customary in our revolutionary democracy, the Venezuelan
people expressed themselves in a conscious, peaceful and massive manner to
elect, with full guarantees, transparency and freedom, the Venezuelan Head of
State and Government for the 2025-2031 term. President Nicolas Maduro was re-
elected with a clear and overwhelming support.

After this great popular victory, the oligarchy of my country resorted, once again,
to the disregard of laws and institutions, triggering a criminal violence that left
27 dead, hundreds wounded, and the destruction of public and private property.
With the use of criminal gangs, they set up barricades, burned schools, hospitals
and public institutions, and assassinated ordinary citizens for their political
affiliations.

None of this will be reported in the mainstream media. Worse still, neither does
the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, who, despite having received all
the information about these criminal acts and the responsible actions deployed
by the Venezuelan State, has preferred to turn the victims into perpetrators and
the perpetrators into victims.

Over the last two days, this fascist and disinformation campaign against our
country has been fed from this rostrum. The government of the United States of
America and its satellite and servile governments have dedicated themselves to
lying, attacking and threatening our people from this place, which is a symbol of
peace and understanding, trying to impose a false narrative.

But here we come, once again, to present the truth about Venezuela and our
people; today, we come to unmask all these phonies.

Mr. President,

35. At the forefront of this gigantic operation is, as usual, the government of the
United States of America and its agencies, as part of its failed policy of continued
coup d'état against the Bolivarian Revolution of Venezuela, which began more
than 25 years ago.

36. From their territory, specifically from the State of Florida, terrorist attacks against
public officials and public facilities are planned. They also use social networks
with impunity and full support from the White House to promote mercenary
incursions, as already happened in May 2020.

37. Although Washington denies involvement, this time, they were caught red-
handed. Investigations into the latest aggression plots have shown that several U.S.
and European mercenaries, including an active U.S. military officer specializing
in terrorist and destabilization operations, were behind the post-electoral
violence.

38. These criminals have confessed that they intended to assassinate President
Nicolas Maduro, the Executive Vice-President and several other senior
Venezuelan State officials, as well as attacking critical infrastructure services,
such as water and electricity. We inform you that all have been arrested,
including two people linked to Spain's National Intelligence Centre (CNI, in
Spanish). More than 400 rifles of different types have also been seized, some of
them produced for the exclusive use of the U.S. Armed Forces.

39. In the coming weeks our government will present additional and much stronger
evidence of what happened, which we are certain will shock the world.

Mr. President,

40. An additional phase of this criminal plan of aggression has been developed in
recent days through another group of mercenaries who opened a website in this
country to raise funds to attack Venezuela and carry out assassinations openly.
This initiative has the public backing of U.S. government agencies, U.S. Congress
members, and senators. The hypocritical oligarchic narrative does not condemn
such an aberration.

41. In this context, it is worth to underline the obligation of States to ensure that their
territory is not used to finance, plan, facilitate or commit acts of destabilization,

42.

43,

44.

through the use of mercenaries and terrorists, and, in this sense, we demand that
the U.S. government comply with its international obligations on this subject.

We also have to emphasize that these terrorist plots, planned for months, took
place at the very same time as the negotiations and the signing of agreements
between Venezuela and the United States of America in Doha, in September last
year, through which we sought to move towards a normalization phase of
relations between the two nations. This is further proof that the empire's word
and supposed goodwill cannot be trusted.

The Venezuelan people demand the immediate fulfilment of the commitments
agreed in Doha to lift all unilateral coercive measures that illegally weigh on our
country today, and we thank the government of the State of Qatar for its good
offices as facilitator of these negotiations.

Furthermore, and we have to say so, all this is also happening while the
government of the United States of America, which promotes and finances
criminal actions around the world, includes Cuba, without any basis whatsoever,
in a spurious list of countries allegedly accused of sponsoring terrorism. We also
demand an end to this attack against the homeland of Marti and Fidel, which
further deepens the impact of the blockade.

Mr. President,

45.

46.

47.

This new aggression against Venezuela, that is still in full swing, will have exactly
the same destiny as all the previous ones: a resounding failure.

Despite the psychological operations aimed at creating confusion, despite
Washington's overt and covert operations within the framework of a so-called
“maximum pressure” policy, social peace reigns in Venezuela today. The plans
to generate violence have been defeated, thanks to the determination of our
people to defend their right to live in peace.

Moreover, Venezuela has experienced growth today that has allowed it to insert
itself strongly into the world economic dynamic, contributing its strengths to the
production of energy, food, and basic goods and services. This epic has been
possible thanks to the determination of the Venezuelan people and the firm
leadership that has managed to confront the blockade.

Mr. President,

48.

49.

50.

Amid this juncture, our call to the free and peace-loving peoples of the world is
to strengthen unity in the face of those who want to divide us, in order to achieve
their plans of neocolonial domination. It is time for the Global South; it is time for
that longed-for New World Order; it is time to consolidate this new pluripolar
and multicentric world of peace and economic prosperity, free of hegemonies; it
is time to rescue the founding principles contained in the UN Charter, and to
honor the promise that this Organization is at the service of “We the peoples”, as
stated in its preamble.

Venezuela puts its Bolivarian Diplomacy of Peace at the service of humanity to
advance in that direction, as demonstrated by its leadership at the head of the
“Group of Friends in Defense of the Charter of the United Nations”.

These are the principles that constitute the narrative of free peoples, which are
expressed in new forms of partnership based on the principles of solidarity and
complementarity, such as the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America
(ALBA-TCP), the BRICS and other hopeful horizons of the emerging new world
order, in which our country continues to insert itself at an accelerated pace.

Mr. President,

51.

52.

53.

Let me conclude by emphasizing that, in Venezuela, we are still on our feet,
waging battles, hand in hand with our people, in permanent popular
organization and mobilization, and in the struggle to continue consolidating our
independence.

No matter who is the head of the U.S. imperialism that speaks before this rostrum
ina year’ time, rest assured that the clear and rebellious voice of the people of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will continue to be present in this forum under
the firm leadership of President Nicolas Maduro Moros, as we stand determined
to resist U.S. imperialism.

With Bolivar we say: “God grants victory to constancy”!

I thank you, Mr. President.

