Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY H.E.TO LAM,
GENERAL SECRETARY, PRESIDENT
OF THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM
at the General Debate of the Seventy-ninth Session
of the United Nations General Assembly
(24 September 2024, New York, United States)

His Excellency President of the United Nations General Assembly.
His Excellency Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Distinguished delegates,

Let me first congratulate you, Your Excellency Philemon Yang, on
your election as the President of the 79th Session of the United Nations
General Assembly. I trust that this Session will be a great success.

I also commend His Excellency Dennis Francis, President of the 78"
Session of the General Assembly, and His Excellency Anténio Guterres, the
UN Secretary-General, for their contributions and efforts in coordinating UN
endeavors to prevent wars, maintain peace and promote global development
cooperation.

Mr. President,

The world is undergoing transformative changes of historic
significance. Although peace, cooperation and development remain the
dominant trends, they are facing new and more serious challenges. Strategic
competition among major powers is becoming broader, fiercer and more
confrontational. Political disputes, conflicts and security environment
intensify. Survival and development space narrows. Risks of conflict, new
hot spots, arm race, tension, confrontation and direct clashes increase.

The rise of power politics and egoistic nationalism are challenging
international law and eroding multilateral institutions and diminishing faith
in global cooperation. The vicious cycle of conflict and violence escalates in
various regions, causing immense suffering to millions of innocent civilians.
The risk of nuclear war, or even a third world war, has not been ruled out.
Non-traditional security challenges, such as climate change, extreme
weather events, natural disasters, epidemics, resource depletion, aging, etc. are
becoming increasingly severe, hindering our efforts for development. Poor
countries are being left further behind with a widening development gap.

Super typhoon Yagi, which devastatingly ravaged Viet Nam and other
countries in the region, serves as a stark warning of the severe impact that
natural disasters and climate change can have on sustainable development for
all.

Global food production is sufficient to feed one and a half times the
world population, yet famine threatens over 780 million people, and 2.4 billion
people endure food insecurity. Defense expenditure has reached a record USD
2 A trillion in 2023, yet we struggle to pool USD 100 billion for climate action.
With only a third of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) timeline
remaining, 80% of the targets may not be met.

Global economic growth faces difficulties. Decoupling and
fragmentation, along with economic pressures and sanctions, threaten rapid
and sustainable development. The fourth industrial revolution offers
opportunities for quantum progress, but it also poses security and safety
challenges for society and individuals.

These unprecedented challenges to peace, cooperation, sustainable
development and human dignity affect this generation and the next. They
compel us to unite, act and work together, upholding the role of international
institutions, foremost among them the United Nations, regional
organizations, including ASEAN, to achieve the ultimate goal of ending war,
abolishing all forms of oppression, exploitation, building peace and creating
a better world to bring happiness to all humankind.

In this spirit, I would like to share Viet Nam’s vision for a more
peaceful, stable, cooperative, prosperous and sustainable future for everyone:

First, as peace and stability are the foundation of a prosperous future,
we must promote the observance of international law and the UN Charter by
all states, particularly the major powers. Each state must act responsibly,
fulfill its commitments, and abide by international law and the UN Charter,
including fundamental principles such as the peaceful settlement of disputes,
non-use of force, sovereign equality, territorial integrity and respect for the
political systems chosen by the people of each nation. States should also
contribute to the common work of the international community in line with
their capabilities. We must tirelessly strengthen solidarity, sincerity and trust
among nations, uphold dialogue, eliminate confrontation and firmly oppose
unilateral embargoes and sanctions that contravene international law and the
UN Charter.

Second, we must ensure equitable development for every state,
community, and individual, recognizing the diverse economic, social, and
cultural conditions they may have. Every resource must be effectively
unleashed, marshaled, and utilized for development according to each
country's needs. We must prioritize resources where they are most needed for
implementing the SDGs, with particular attention to assisting developing and
less-developed countries, especially through preferential loans, transfer of
advanced technologies, investment and trade facilitation, and debt relief for
poor countries.

Third, we should urgently create smart global governance frameworks
with long term vision for science and technology, particularly emerging
technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI). This will ensure we make
progress and enjoy the benefits of these technologies, while actively
preventing and repelling threats to peace, sustainable development and
humanity. In this regard, I welcome the documents adopted at the Summit for
the Future, especially the Global Digital Compact. This will serve as a crucial
basis for advancing global governance and international cooperation in these
areas.

Fourth, we should adopt innovative thinking to build a transformative
future across all sectors, focusing on digital transformation, green transition,
and global governance transformation. Green transition and digital
transformation are essential tools for countries, especially developing ones,
to build resilience and self-reliance, enabling a timely and active prevention
of and response to shocks, crises and potential disasters. We must also
prioritize reforming multilateral mechanisms, especially the UN system and
international financial and monetary institutions, to ensure better
representation, equity and transparency. Enhancing their capability,
effectiveness, and future-readiness is essential for remaining relevant in our
changing world.

Fifth, we must place the human person at the centre in delivering on our
visions. People should be the centre, goal and driver of all policies and actions
at all levels. Investment should focus on the holistic development of the youth,
enriching their knowledge and culture, grounded in shared values and a sense
of responsibility and contribution.

Viet Nam welcomes the UNGA's official decision to grant additional
rights and privileges of the participation to the State of Palestine from this
Session onwards. Viet Nam reaffirms its solidarity with the State and People
of Cuba and calls on the United States to lift embargoes and sanctions against
Cuba and to remove Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism.

Mr. President,

President Ho Chi Minh, a Vietnamese hero of national liberation and
eminent man of culture, once stressed “Unity, unity, great unity — Success,
success, grand success”. Only through unity and cooperation, with trust and
by thinking and acting as one, can we successfully build a world of peace,
sustainable development and human dignity for present and future
generations, ensuring no one is left behind.

In today's rapidly changing world, each state plays a vital role in the
grand orchestration of our era. Viet Nam is making every effort to move
forward toward a future of peace, stability, prosperity and sustainability—not
only for our own people but also for all nations worldwide. This is Viet Nam’s
vision, goal and strong commitment to the international community, today
and tomorrow.

Thank you for your attention.
