Check against delivery!

STATEMENT
BY H.E. MR. RUMEN RADEV, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF BULGARIA
791 SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
GENERAL DEBATE, 25 SEPTEMBER 2024

MR. PRESIDENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY,
MR. SECRETARY-GENERAL,

EXCELLENCIES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,

Allow me at the outset to congratulate H. E. Mr. Philemon Yang for his election as President of
the 79th United Nations General Assembly Session. I believe, Mr. President, that under your
leadership and through your vision, the international community will move forward on the
agenda of strengthening the values of the UN Charter — an effort that the humanity now needs

the most.

Our world faces a range of complex problems. From the unprecedented challenge to the global
peace and security to the escalating climate crisis and the persistent inequalities. We are
confronted with a complex array of issues that require our immediate attention and concerted

effort. We need to light a spark that ignites change.

With this in mind, my country approaches the 79‘ session of the UN General Assembly with
renewed determination to promote multilateral and workable solutions achieved through
negotiations and based on the UN Charter. We must follow that path for the sake of the survival

of humankind and the future generations.

Taking this in consideration, we praise the Pact of the Future as a move towards a vital
transformation. It becomes increasingly clear that our success hinges on a firm commitment to
upholding multilateralism and the respect for international law, which are the cornerstones of
our global order. This order that has been forged in UN by you and your predecessors is now
under severe threat. Bulgaria has been always committed to the values of multilateralism and
will continue to be, using the accumulated experience from the successful Bulgarian presidency
of the UN Economic and Social Council and our current mandate as a constructive member of

the Human Rights Council.
Excellencies,

In 2015 all UN Member States adopted with unanimity 17 Sustainable Development Goals,
providing a shared blueprint for peace and prosperity for the whole planet. Nowadays they
remain more than ever topical and requiring full mobilization of international efforts. However,
we must admit that the sheer deterioration of the international peace and security
environment in the last years is threatening the fulfillment of our sustainable development
agenda, undermining the rules based international order. Restoring and preserving the peace
must not be seen but as the ultimate goal of the international community and is a basic

prerequisite for the SDG’s fulfillment.

It has been two and a half years since the Russian Federation unleashed a full-scale invasion of
Ukraine. From the very beginning, Bulgaria strongly condemns this war, which led to hundreds
of thousands of victims, enormous suffering and destruction. Every single day of this war
increases the risk of escalation in intensity and geographical scope, posing a substantial threat to
the global peace and security. The side effects of the war are already gravely affecting the
economies and social systems of many countries worldwide. That is why the international
community should seek ways that lead to de-escalation and dialogue. We should support every
diplomatic effort that pursues comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine in conformity

with the United Nations Charter and International law.

Since the last year UN General Debate, we have witnessed a significant increase in instability
across the Middle East. The conflict between Israel and Hamas after the Hamas brutal attack on
Israel triggered a major deterioration of the security in the region with global projections. We
must not forget the consequences which followed — tens of thousands dead and injured civilians
in Gaza, the total destruction of vital infrastructure and mass displacement of people. We call for
immediate ceasefire, free access of the humanitarian convoys as well as release of all hostages
held by Hamas. We are also deeply concerned about the recent development in Lebanon,
bringing a qualitative new and dangerous dimension in the conflict and increasing the risk of its
regional enlargement. We call for refraining from use of force, for wisdom and de-escalation.
The spiral of violence and the human suffering must come to an end. The only way to achieve
sustainable and lasting peace in this region with its very fragile security landscape is the two-

state solution.

Amid the ongoing destabilization around different regions, the collective goal for a world
without nuclear threat remains more critical than ever. In line with the New Agenda for Peace,
Bulgaria will maintain its commitment to uphold, protect and strengthen the multilateral
framework for disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. We remain dedicated to the

universalization and full implementation of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, recognizing it
as the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime, which serves as the essential
foundation for pursuing nuclear disarmament and plays a crucial role in the development of

nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.

As we address these challenges, prioritizing regional stability becomes vital. My country
actively engages in political dialogue with South-East European countries, driven by the
conviction that the region's security, stability, and prosperity are crucial for broader regional and
international resilience. Bulgaria is a strong supporter of the European path of the Western
Balkan countries. Our main priorities vis-a-vis the region are fostering good neighborliness,
improving connectivity, protection of human rights and combating ethnic discrimination.
However, a serious challenge on this path are the new outbursts of incitements of hatred.
Fighting and curbing the aggressive nationalistic rhetoric all over the region and concentrating
on positive agenda of strengthening multiethnic societies and the rights of the constituent

communities, will prevent the evocation of the reminiscences of the troubled past of the region.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

Progress on achieving the Sustainable Development Goals is the greatest investment for the
benefit of the present and future generations. Bulgaria keeps on contributing actively to these
common efforts through the steady implementation of the National Development Program
Bulgaria 2030 and of sustainable projects for development cooperation with partner countries
through supporting projects in education, healthcare, public infrastructure and services, as well

as renewable energy solutions.

We face a growing number of places around the globe where worrying dynamics in terms of
governance, democracy and human rights emerge. As a present member to the Human Rights
Council, we reaffirm our commitment to this noble cause. Bulgaria has never looked the other
way, and this speaks up through our domestic policies, our membership in the Human Rights
Council, our work as co-chair of the Group of Friends of Children and Sustainable Development
Goals, Vice-President of UNICEF Bureau, member of the Executive Board of UN-Women and
through our support for initiatives, that empower the General Assembly and aim at
accountability. Our advocacy for meaningful participation of civil society, youth, and women in
decision-making processes across the United Nations system and domestically have already
yielded results and our Youth Delegate Program inspires more young people to choose the path

of active citizens.

Bulgaria advocates for a human rights-based approach to sustainable development and looks

forward to the inclusion of all stakeholders at the upcoming World Social Summit.
Excellencies,

We've focused on peace among nations, but it's equally important to reconcile with nature.
Climate change is a threat multiplier for the implementation of all Sustainable Development
Goals. We urge enhanced action based on the Global Stocktake, more ambitious climate
objectives, including the new finance goal at 29t Session of the United Nations Climate Change
Conference (COP 29). Earlier this year Bulgaria hosted the 615 session of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, which gave impetus to the Panel’s 7 assessment cycle, including the
production of the Special Report on Climate Change and Cities. Through various parallel events
we were able to invigorate the science discussion paying due attention to the Climate Risks in
the Black Sea Region as well as to the urban environment, the role of the cities and the need to

adapt to a changing climate.

Another challenge, that brings a lot of opportunities as well, is the need for an effective digital
governance, based on a multi-stakeholder and inclusive approach, aiming for a human-centric

digital transformation and a safe and open digital future.

In light of growing challenges to the principles of international law and the rules-based order
established by the United Nations Charter, Bulgaria remains committed to strengthening the
effectiveness and accountability of the United Nations Security Council. We support efforts to
enhance transparency and accountability within this body, co-sponsoring the key UN General
Assembly resolution on veto use. Bulgaria emphasizes the need for greater effectiveness and
prioritizes securing an additional non-permanent seat for the Group of Eastern European States

in a reformed Council.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Let us reaffirm our commitment to addressing these global challenges with firmness and
determination. The actions we take today will define the future, and with courage and unity, we

will rise to meet the opportunities that lie ahead.

Thank you for your attention.
