UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

Minister Joly’s Address to the United Nations General Assembly
September 30", 2024

UN HQ, New York, New York

M. le Président, chers collegues,

C’est un honneur pour moi de prendre la parole devant vous au nom

du Canada, et au nom des Canadiens.

Je tiens a souligner que je me joins a vous sur le territoire

traditionnel du peuple Lenape [LEN-ah-PAY].

Cette reconnaissance est importante, car aujourd’hui au Canada,
nous marquons la Journée nationale de la vérité et de la
réconciliation, au cours de laquelle nous reconnaissons et
commémorons les peuples autochtones qui nous ont précédé et

continuent d’y vivre.

Nous reconnaissons la douleur causée par des décennies d'abus,

de négligence et de racisme.

C'est aussi l'occasion pour nous de nous engager a faire mieux et a

réparer les erreurs du passé afin d'aller de l'avant, ensemble.
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS

Ours is a country based on the rights and freedoms that are

enshrined in our constitutional Charter.

A core reason Canada is a prosperous society - is that beyond
offering the freedom to pursue a better life for you and your family —

it also provides a freedom from the barr-lers that prevent you from

enjoying a better life.
Freedom from fear, violence, intimidation and discrimination.
Freedoms that foster a sense of inclusivity and belonging.

Freedom that protects the vulnerable and builds stronger

communities.

Far too often, though, some of the loudest voices claiming to

speak for freedom are the ones trying to redefine that word for

their own purposes.

UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

They claim freedom as an excuse to do -as they wish- without any

regard for the freedom of others.

That is certainly not how we should define freedom.

[PAUSE]

They hide behind the word to tell us everything is broken,

to spread disinformation; and

parrot the lines fed to them by those who wish to interfere in our

elections and undermine our democracy.

They weaponize the term “freedom” to further marginalize those in

the most vulnerable situations,
to justify spreading hate, and

even deny people their right to make choices about their own

bodies.

Including limits on reproductive rights.
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

At the end of the day —- through all of the noise - what they really

mean to say is: freedom for some - but not for all.

Often, the people who claim to speak for freedom are the same

people who want the government to decide

who people can love,

who they are, or

even what they can wear.

We see it in our country. We see it around the world.

At the international level we see it when groups or countries declare

that international law doesn’t apply to them.

AFGHANISTAN

In Afghanistan, we see it taken to its extreme — as the Taliban

continue to impose inhumAne rules against women and girls.
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

Banning them from being in public so they are invisible,
Robbing young girls of the fundamental right to an education.

How is that respecting human dignity? How is that protecting the

best interests of their people?
[PAUSE]
They need to be held accountable.

Last week, Canada joined Australia, Germany and the Netherlands,
with the support from 22 other countries, to take steps to hold
Afghanistan accountable under the Convention on the Elimination

of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.

The Taliban cannot make international law disappear through

simple decrees.

[PAUSE]
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

Canada is a country that values freedom from oppression — not the

freedom to oppress others.

There should be nothing controversial about protecting human

rights - including the dignity of all men and women alike.
[PAUSE]
HAITI

On Haiti, the world cannot sit idly by as people suffer.

La violence des gangs et la corruption incontrélées en Haiti ont créé
une situation catastrophique pour la population, plongée dans une
situation d’insécurité profonde ou des civils tombent sous les balles

et des enfants meurent de faim.

Le Canada maintient depuis toujours que la solution a cette crise

doit provenir des Haitiens, pour le bénéfice des Haitiens.

Ace titre, le Conseil présidentiel de transition et le gouvernement de
transition s'efforcent de rétablir l'ordre, mais ils ne peuvent y arriver

seuls.
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

Le peuple haitien a besoin d'une mission multinationale de soutien
a la sécurité qui travaille conjointement avec la Police nationale
d’Haiti non seulement pour aider celle-ci a rétablir l'ordre, mais

pour subvenir aux besoins de base de la population.

Voila pourquoi le Canada a investi plus de 100 millions pour la

soutenir.
Le Canada fait sa part.

Nous devons tous démontrer au peuple haitien que nous n’allons

pas les abandonner.
Le Conseil de sécurité des Nations Unies doit étre clair a cet effet.

Je tiens a remercier la CARICOM et le Kenya pour le réle essentiel

qu'ils jouent dans la réponse a cette crise.

Ensemble, nous pouvons parvenir a une paix et une stabilité

durables en Haiti.
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

MIDDLE EAST
Mr. President,

What continues to happen in the Middle East is an unspeakable

tragedy.

Thousands have been killed in Israel, Gaza and Lebanon - including

many Canadians.

This is a senseless war that goes against the dignity of human

beings.
The suffering — on all sides —- must end.

What the world continues to witness is a repeated cycle of violence

where civilians pay the heaviest price.
[PAUSE]

Canada is joining those urging Israel and Hezbollah to accept an
immediate ceasefire. We need to create space for peace talks and

save lives.

[PAUSE]
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

There cannot be war in Lebanon. Full stop.
UN Security council resolutions must be respected.

Families in Southern Lebanon and families in Northern Israel must

be able to safely return to their homes.

We have - and always will - insist that civilians be protected,

wherever they’re from.
[PAUSE]

Next week marks one year since the terrorist attacks by Hamas

against Israel.
[PAUSE]

Last March, | visited kibbutz Kfar Aza — one of communities attacked

on October 7".

| met Ayalet, a mother grieving her son who was murdered in the

attack — he died protecting his fiancée.

Ayalet recounted the terror of that day. The search for loved ones in

burned homes.

[PAUSE]
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

As she spoke about the horrors of October 7*,

we heard the bombs as they landed on Gaza nearby and felt the
ground shudder.

In that moment, the duality of the tragedy befalling the Israeli and

Palestinian people was profound.

Itis amoment | will never forget.

The situation in Gaza is inhumane.

The level of suffering is unacceptable. It must stop.

Innocent Palestinians, women and children, cannot pay the price of

defeating Hamas. It must end.
A ceasefire is needed immediately. Hostages must be released.
This requires both sides making real efforts.

[PAUSE]

10
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

Mr. President,

For lasting peace, Canada has long advocated for a two-state

solution.
We believe both Israelis and Palestinians have the right to exist.

We all know a negotiated agreement is the best chance for Israelis

and Palestinians to live side by side in peace and security.

Unfortunately, Hamas, a terrorist organization, continues to operate
in Gaza, refuses to release hostages and refuses to lay down its

weapons.

Meanwhile, the government of Israel is against the creation of a

Palestinian State.

Violence against Palestinians by extremist settlers and expansion of

settlements by Israel in the West Bank continue unabated.
This is unacceptable.

[PAUSE]

11
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

Canada supports the creation of a Palestinian State.

That is why we are providing security and development support to

the Palestinian people.

We will officially recognize the State of Palestine at the right time,
when it is most conducive to building a lasting peace, and

not necessarily as the last step of a negotiated process.

[PAUSE]

More than anything, this conflict has led to unspeakable pain.
Communities are hurting.

People have the right to protest peacefully. But nobody has the

freedom to intimidate others.
Polarization is a problem. Division is real.

We have a collective responsibility to bring people together.

12
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

UKRAINE
Mr. President,

It’s now been 2 and a half years since Russia launched its illegal

invasion of Ukraine.

The human cost continues to grow.

No country has the freedom to invade its neighbor.
There’s no freedom to impose your will on others.
This aggression is a blatant violation of the UN Charter.
[PAUSE]

Russia needs to get out of Ukraine now.

[PAUSE]

The Ukrainian people have the right to be free from fear, free from

aggression.

They have the right to decide what their own future should be.

13
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

Mr. President, we all know that if Russia’s aggression goes

unchecked here — it will continue.

Many countries in the region, and the hemisphere, are wondering if

they will be next.

The world must not back down in denouncing this unjustifiable

aggression.

Canada will not back down from its support for Ukraine.

[PAUSE]

At the end of October, Canada will host a conference co-organized
with Norway and Ukraine on the human dimension of Ukraine’s 10-

point peace formula.

We will focus on the return of children to their families as well as

deported civilians and prisoners of war.

Every one of those affected by this war is entitled to freedom from

violence and from being forced from their home.

[PAUSE]

14
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

UN REFORM
Monsieur le Président,

Les enjeux dont je viens de parler soulévent d’immenses défis.
Cette institution a un réle a jouer pour nous faire cheminer

ensemble vers des solutions.

Les détracteurs des Nations Unies lui reprochent d’étre incapable
de résoudre les problémes auxquels le monde est présentement
confronté.

Encore pire, certains, plus conspirateurs, pensent méme que l'ONU
est la cause de plusieurs de ces problemes.

Les uns comme les autres ignorent la réalité et la force de cette

organisation.

Les Nations Unies constituent un forum unique, qui nous permet de
nous rassembler et de nous parler, sur un pied d’égalité. Pour tenter
d'aplanir nos divergences — qui sont parfois profondes - par la

discussion et la recherche du consensus.

15
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

C’est la raison pour laquelle le Canada a soutenu l’adoption du
Pacte pour le futur lors du Sommet pour le futur la semaine

derniére.

Le Pacte est un point de départ alors que nous travaillons ensemble

a assurer la pérennité de Vorganisation.

L’ONU n’est pas une organisation parfaite, c’est vrai, mais le progrés

y est possible.

Comme l'a dit le Secrétaire général : « Nous ne pouvons tout
simplement pas construire un avenir pour nos petits-enfants avec
un systeme construit par nos grands-parents ». Construisons cet
avenir ensemble.

[PAUSE]
Monsieur le Président,

Depuis prés de 80 ans, aucune femme n'a occupé le poste de

secrétaire général.
C’est inacceptable.

[PAUSE]

16
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

La semaine derniére, j’ai eu le grand honneur, avec ma collegue de
la Jamaique, d'accueillir 4 Toronto une quinzaine de femmes

ministres des affaires étrangéres des quatre coins du monde.

Notre constat est clair. Le prochain dirigeant de cette illustre

institution doit étre une femme.

llest grand temps que l’on puisse dire, de fagon honorable, sur cette

tribune et a travers le monde : « Madame la Secrétaire générale ».

[PAUSE]

17
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

Je vous dirais la méme chose pour le poste de président de

UAssemblée générale.

Monsieur le Président, avec tout le respect que vous m’inspirez,
j'espére que l'année prochaine, les délégués s'adresseront a

Madame la Présidente.

Je sais que nous sommes nombreux et nombreuses a partager ce

souhait.
[PAUSE]
Monsieur le Président,

Laissez-moi vous parler de ma mere. Elle sera tellement fiére que je

parle d’elle aux Nations Unies.

Vous savez, ma mére et ma grand-mére font partie des millions de
femmes dans le monde qui ont lutté avec acharnement pour

Végalité des droits.

Elles V’ont fait aux cétés de méres et de grand-méres de bien des

gens réunis dans cette enceinte.

18
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

Récemment, maman me disait que nous faisions maintenant partie

de la « génération de la consolidation ». Elle a bien raison.
[PAUSE]

Being part of our generation means that we need to consolidate the
gains that have been made over time and fight against those who are

trying to roll back this progress.

It also means that we need to continue to fight so that women and
girls everywhere have the right to make choices about their own

bodies and their own lives.
We see the difference this gap in freedoms creates.

When women are robbed of the right to decide when to have

children, they lose out on education and job opportunities.

When women don’t have access to safe abortions their lives are put

at risk.

19
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

When women are denied access to safe contraception and fertility
treatments, they lose the power to make choices that have the most

profound impacts on their lives.

Attacks on sexual and reproductive health rights are an attack on

equality rights. They’re an affront to basic dignity.
[PAUSE]

Nous devons toujours avoir le droit de choisir pour nous-mémes :
quels moyens de contraception utilisés, le choix d’avoir recours a
Vavortement ou encore a la procréation assistée. Nous, les femmes,
avons le droit d’étre égale en tout : en éducation, en emploi et en

toute autre opportunité.
Nous sommes femmes et fiéres de l’étre.
Jamais nous ne pouvons reculer.

Ensemble, nous devons continuer d’avancer pour nos sceurs, nos

filles et nos petites-filles.

[PAUSE]

20
UNCLASSIFIED | NON CLASSIFIE

Mr. President,

Two years ago, | stood here and said countries around the world

were faced with a choice.
And we still have that choice today.

We can choose a world where rules can be broken by the powerful —

bringing us back to darker times of tension and conflicts.

Or we can choose a world that upholds human rights, opportunities

for all, peace and prosperity.
Where people work together to solve problems.

Canada will work with partners to move us beyond this moment of

crisis.
A new future is being shaped.
We must not fail.

Thank you. Merci.

21
