Address by the President of the Republic of Estonia Alar Karis
at the 79th United Nations General Assembly
24 September 2024

Mr President,

Mr Secretary General,
Excellences,

Dear ladies and gentlemen,

| want to live in a world that is in Peace. In a world that is not destroying itself. Where proud
sovereign nations, big or small, old or young, modern or traditional are not conquered and
colonized. In a world where everybody can feel free. Where Al serves and not hinders
humanity and where nobody has to fear oppression based on gender, race, nation, beliefs or
one’s thoughts.

| want to live in a world that is fit for freedom. Because freedom paves the way for lasting
solutions and prosperity. Because freedom is the core of humanity.

Don’t we all want the same? Regrettably peace and freedom are under threat. The latest
survey by Freedom House proved that “global freedom declined for the 18th consecutive year
in 2023.” The number of those countries, where political rights and civil liberties are
diminishing is more than twofold in comparison to those where rights, liberties and freedom
are improving.

Peace and freedom are words that are unfortunately blatantly misused. Too often we see,

how the one promising peace and freedom brings instead suppression and suffering.

The weaker the mechanisms that protect international law, the bigger is the threat to
undermine the way most of us want to live.

We may keep condemning the brutal acts of violence. We may even strongly condemn the
atrocities, but without efficient acts against violence the history will condemn us. And it will
condemn us strongly.

But its not our place in history that we have to worry about. Something else keeps us awake
at night. It’s the children who are lost to conflicts. Who will be never old enough to see the
high school diploma. Who will never have the chance to learn how to ride a bike. Who will
never dance in the desert.

Who will not be free, who will not be smiling...
..but, dear ladies and gentlemen,

the happiness of a child is priceless. This image should set our moral compass right. Personal
and global, strategic and tactical.
This image will be reality on the shores of Gulf of Aden, Azov Sea, Bay of Bengal, Dead Sea,
Caspian Sea, Lake Tanganyka, Yellow Sea or anywhere in the world when the universally
shared rules prevail. When the international law is respected. When UN Charter is applied.

Therefore, we have no other option than to act and adjust the UN system so that it could live
up to the demands and necessities of the 21st century. It means reinforcing the UN Charter.

Restoring the credibility and reforming the UN should grant better and more efficient
application of the Charter so that peace and security is maintained in everyone’s interest and
everywhere in the world.

The need to reform the UN and its Security Council has been discussed for decades. | am
convinced that now more than ever, the renewal and strengthening of the multilateral world
order with UN Charter at its core is in the interest of all of us.

Pact for the Future that we adopted at the Summit of the Future just a few days agoisa good
start. It is guideline showing us the way forward. Now, we must implement all we have
pledged.

We should have been even more ambitious. The future Security Council has to be fit-for-
purpose, efficient, transparent, open and accountable with a strengthened decision-making
capacity. The Council’s composition must adequately reflect the current world. It must also be
inclusive in conducting its business to better respond to the current global threats.

But there is no easy formula how to grant it. Otherwise, we would have a balanced, agile and
effective Security Council already in place. One thing is certain — and it is acknowledged also
by the Pact for the Future — that the scope and use of the veto right has to be limited. Estonia
supports all efforts to limit the use of the veto, especially on actions aimed at ending or
preventing mass atrocities.

Currently the veto right in the Security Council hands its holder a great power. A power also
to put finding the solutions ona standstill. As sometimes that solution mightsharply be against
the interest of the member of the Security Council itself.

The deadlocks of the Security Council can be measured directly in lost and crippled human
lives. This is not right and this is unacceptable.

We believe that all states collectively should have bigger say in maintaining peace and security
than one member of the Security Council. Especially in the case of a deadlock in the Security
Council.

We cannot restore the credibility of the multilateral system and the UN when a permanent
member of the Security Council acts against the principles of the Charter. Therefore, let us use
wisely the powers of the General Assembly.

We, in the General Assembly should be able to collectively overcome the veto in the Security
Council if the situation requires. Let us analyze the options how the General Assembly could
gain more prominence. In addition, | recommend taking this analysis to our capitals, to
different conferences around the world, collecting new ideas from the inclusive global debate.
Pact for the Future acknowledges the need for revitalizing the work of General Assembly. Also
in connection of strengthening the coordination with Security Council. Among other things it
means that the future peace operations would better respond to existing challenges and
emerging realities. The preciseness and sharpness of the Pact for Future allows us to believe
that the United Nations 2.0 is an idea that is also capable of meeting the current challenges
on the ground.

Dear ladies and gentlemen,

the pain of losing a close one is grave. It hurts us no matter where this happens. The life will
never be the same after such a tragedy. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine causes inhumane
suffering.

As does the war in Gaza, or the worsening fighting in Sudan, or the tensions, instability, human
rights violations in Sahel, the war in Syria, the unresolved Rohingya crisis, the humanitarian
catastrophe in Yemen or the suppression and torture of girls and women in Afghanistan.

Since the horrific terrorist attacks by Hamas against Israel almost a year ago, there has been
too much suffering in Gaza and the region. The destruction, loss of life and trauma is
unimaginable. It only leads to a vicious cycle of violence and deepening hatred. We believe it
is high time for an agreement that would establish a ceasefire and allow for the release of
hostages.

Without being naive or blind to regional complexity, Estonia is deeply convinced that the two-
state solution is the only way to just and lasting peace. Israelis and Palestinians both deserve
to live in a free, sovereign country, within secure and recognized borders. We must step up
efforts to achieve this goal.

Dear ladies and gentlemen,

In this very room, the global community has condemned Russia’s aggression against Ukraine.
Russia has attacked international peace and security and the UN Charter. That’s a fact.
Confirmed also by the General Assembly. We must also firmly condemn the actions of those
who arm Russia in this aggression — Iran and North Korea.

It has been becoming increasingly important not to lose the sight. We can not and we will not
accept blurring the ,,realities on the ground“. Russia’s war against Ukraine is as clear as black
and white. Russia is the aggressor and Ukraine is the victim. Russian violations against
international law are brutal and widely documented. Russia has systematically killed civilians.

Ukrainian children are deported to camps far away from their homes and parents in order to
teach how to think correctly.

Unfortunately sending people in the so-called correction camps where they are taught “right”
behavioral patterns are not precedent in today’s world. It makes me wonder in which century
do we actually live in?

What would any of us do if the aggressor, the murderer of our parents, would stand in front
of us?
Would we demand justice, accountability and the end of aggressive behavior or would we call
the aggressor for a chat to settle misunderstandings between us?

Deplorably the smooth talk about dialogue and importance for Ukraine and Russia to engage
in direct peace talks are only supporting Russian cause. Especially when those so-called peace
proposals fail to recognize who is the one who has launched the aggression. And who is the
one suffering.

We are not going to call Russia for a coffee.

Instead, we call them to accept President Zelenskyy’s 10 point peace formula which has wide
international support. Russia has to end the aggression, withdraw its troops and military
equipment from the territory of Ukraine. Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty must
be restored.

We demand Russia to stop cynically and shamelessly exploiting various conflicts to its own
advantage. By fueling contradictions in Africa, Europe, America or elsewhere — Russia attacks
the coherence of our societies and generates instability.

Misinformation is a widely used weapon for this purpose. We have to act decisively against
systematic spread of lies. To succeed in this, we must develop critical thinking and knowledge.
Therefore, granting the education globally for everybody is so strategically important.

While drafting the UN resolutions we must consider the new mechanisms that are weaponized
and used to undermine international peace and security. The world has changed. Information
is rushing in various digital formats and we tend to live in fragmented bubbles.

This can in turn be fertile ground for extremist terrorist groups or for neo-imperial
expansionist ambitions. Similarly, refugees are sometimes used for destabilizing actions.
Changing world poses new challenges. Let’s make sure that that UN methods, agencies and
resolutions meet the requirements of 21st century.

Dear ladies and gentlemen,

Last year Estonia proposed the Fit for Freedom agenda that calls for a global discussion. First
on how to reinforce multilateralism and international rules-based system with the UN Charter
at its core. Second, how to foster inclusive decision-making of all states and societies. And
third, how to ensure human rights and freedoms for all.

The central idea of Fit for Freedom is simple — international law must be upheld, the rules
must apply. Only then we are all better off. We do not need global cataclysm to build
something instead of the UN. We have learnt from the past and we are able to build on the
structures of the UN already in place. Most of all it takes political will to succeed.

The possibilities to engage with the work of the Security Council (and its subsidiary organs)
should be improved to all the members of the General Assembly. With the distinct help from
technology the accountability of the Security Council has to be enhanced.
If the working culture would be more open, hypocrisy and lies would have indeed shorter legs.
Promoting new open and swift models to work and administer is the second pillar how we can
make the world freer.

This year Estonia chairsthe Media Freedom Coalition and next year Freedom Online Coalition.
We will build on conviction that fundamental freedoms and human rights should be the
mainstream of the international politics. Even more forcefully and consciously than until
today.

If the human and fundamental rights are protected then we may conclude that international
law and UN Charter are not only maintained, but they are strengthened. When international
rules apply to everyone, the world is fit for freedom.

Dear ladies and gentlemen,

positive change is possible. Estonia’s own story is a perfect illustration of that. We have built
a digital, cyber-secure society where citizens feel that they themselves are the state. As it
should be.

We know from our own experience that freedom combined with proper technology and
innovation oriented mindset are the best tools for finding long-term solutions. Yes, also free
societies, might need some updates from time to time and the latest plug-ins for optimized
user friendly performance. But if maintained properly, they are not crashing and freezing like
autocracies tend to do.

Estonians have a vivid memory of the times when human rights were denied to us. This makes
Estonia vigorous in standing up for those fighting for their rights today. We partner with those
who have reached out for a helping hand to enhance children’s access to education and
medicine. We unite with those who work tirelessly to grant women and girls equal rights with
men and boys.

And we are aligned with all who follow the principle of universality and indivisibility of human
rights. My country stands for these principles as a candidate for the UN Human Rights Council
for 2026-2028.

Dear ladies and gentlemen,

What kind of change are we going to see? We know the answer. It is up to us to fix the UN so
that it could safeguard “international peace and security and build a world fit for freedom.

Let’s get to work/let’s do something about it!
