1.

SPEAKING ENGAGEMENT 3

FIJI NATIONAL STATEMENT

His Excellency Ratu Wiliame Maivalili Katonivere, President of
the Republic of Fiji

Thursday, 26 September 2024

The President of the United Nations General Assembly,
Your Excellency Philemon Yang,
Secretary General, Antonio Guterres,

My Fellow Leaders,

| bring you greetings from the people of Fiji.

Page 1 of 15
| would also like to offer sincere congratulations to you,
Mr President, on your election to your high office. We

wish you well in the discharge of your important duties.

As it is my first United Nations General Assembly, | begin by
reiterating the words of the 1* Prime Minister of Fiji, the late
Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara in his inaugural address to this

Assembly, in 1970 — may | quote...

“We do not live by bread alone, and it is only from the firm
base of sound moral and spiritual standards that we can
go on to meaningful economic progress...Quality should
not take second place to quantity especially when we are
estimating a society, its life and accepted values. Quality
is measured by standards, and these standards must be
observed by larger nations as well as by smaller...But it is
for the United Nations to set the standards and to

disseminate them widely...” (Unquote)

Page 2 of 15
This Statement was made when the United Nations was
celebrating its 25"" Anniversary with the theme “Peace, Justice

and Progress”.

In this Assembly, 54 years later, the theme of this 79" Session
“Unity in diversity, for the advancement of peace,
sustainable development and human dignity for everyone

everywhere” — echoes similar sentiments.

It resonates with us in its importance, its relevance from when
Fiji first joined the United Nations, and its urgency, in today’s

precarious global context.

Climate change. Sea Level Rise. Pandemics. Poverty.
Unsustainable Development. Conflicts. Inequalities. Injustices
everywhere. The challenges are daunting.

From Gaza, to Sudan, Ukraine, Afghanistan and beyond —

conflicts rage on, as humanitarian needs escalate.

Page 3 of 15
10.

11.

12.

13.

These are the challenges, we have been fighting since time

immemorial.

It is the background, against which the United Nations was

established in 1945.

Today, the rapid evolution of technology, has made us more

connected than ever before in history.

However, the more connected we are, the wider gaps between
the rich and the poor, the developed and the developing

world.

Small Island Developing States who are on the front lines of
climate change and sea-level rise, continue to grapple with the
impacts of climate-induced disasters, with devastating
consequences for the ecosystem and for vulnerable

communities.

Page 4 of 15
Fellow Leaders,

14. This year, at least 72 countries whose combined population,
comprises almost half of the world's total population, have

already or will soon select their own leaders at the polls.

15. The world is in need of courageous leaders who are willing to
garner the political will, and mobilize the resources; to bridge
the divide, and seek solutions that benefit humankind.

16. We have two choices before us — to give up and go home!

OR to stay the course, renew, redouble our efforts, re-

think and reform — together!

17. The choice we make, will be our legacy.

18. We chose the latter, not for ourselves, but for those coming

after us.

Page 5 of 15
19.

20.

21.

Strong international cooperation, diplomacy, and a
commitment to upholding the principles of the United

Nations are not only important but indispensable.

It is time to go back to the basics. The foundation and purpose

of the United Nations Charter.

We must invest in the empowerment of humankind and the

protection of human rights.

Fellow Leaders,

22.

23.

24.

Next year the United Nations turns 80.

The United Nations is only as strong as its Member States.

For 79 years, the global community has placed its trust in
multilateralism, and in the United Nations to foster
cooperation, uphold human rights, and promote global

stability.

Page 6 of 15
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

We now live in an age of distrust, fueled by the increasing
disconnect between’ people’s expectations and_ the

inadequate responses of the multilateral system.

It is our collective responsibility to counter mis-information

and dis-information.

Trust is a pre-requisite for effective multilateralism.

The continued success of multilateralism is critical. There is
more to be done to ensure the voices of all countries are

heard.

An inclusive and responsive multilateral system must be able

to respond and adapt to the challenges of today.

The stakes are high, for developing countries including Small
Island Developing States and Least Developed Countries that
continue to be “left behind” in the development race, as we

grapple with multiple crises.

Page 7 of 15
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Despite our limited resources, the unfairness of the global
governance system, and obvious inequalities, Small Island

Developing States continue to forge ahead.

We don't have the luxury of time nor can we justify inaction.

Building economic resilience is a requirement for sustainable

development in Small Island Developing States.

Recovery from the frequency and magnitude of climate-

related shocks, including disasters, are a costly affair.

Mobilizing the upfront funding needed for adaptation
remains a challenge, as resources are focused on recovery and

reconstruction.

The adoption of the Multidimensional Vulnerability Index
for Small Island Developing States opens a new chapter in the
ongoing effort to safeguard the future of vulnerable

developing countries.

Page 8 of 15
37.

Mainstreaming Multidimensional Vulnerability Index into
existing practices and policies will help ease the economic
burden for Small Island Developing States, when needed the

most.

Fellow Leaders,

38.

39.

AO.

A1.

Cultivating a culture of peace is now more urgent than ever.

The Blue Pacific Continent knows the value of peace, having

lived through the horrors of its absence.

Our Oceans and its diverse and vibrant lands have been a
theatre of the two World Wars, and a testing ground for the
most dangerous weapons — the impacts of which are still felt

today.

Yesterday, 25'" September, there was a unilateral test firing of

a ballistic missile into the Pacific Ocean.

Page 9 of 15
A2.

43.

44.

45.

We urge respect for our region and call for cessation of such
action. Under Principle 4 of the Ocean of Peace as was
endorsed by the Pacific Leaders in Tonga last month, our
statements reinforce the Pacific's peaceful example to uphold
international law and urge others to refrain from actions that

undermine peace and security in the Blue Pacific.

Under Principle 12, the Ocean of Peace sets and champions

rules of responsible, peaceful and deconflicting behaviour.

Fiji may be a small State, but through our leadership and
stewardship roles in the region, we make a _ profound

contribution to regionalism and multilateralism.

Fiji's first-ever Foreign Policy White Paper, builds on the
three interconnecting themes of Fiji's foreign policy:

sovereignty, security and prosperity.

Page 10 of 15
46.

47.

A8.

Fiji's National Development Plan 2025 - 2029 envisions
empowering the People of Fiji through Unity, based on the
pillars of economic resilience, people empowerment and

good governance.

True to the spirit of multilateralism, our bilateral, regional and

multilateral development partners are a key part of our efforts.

We commit to the principles of the 2050 Strategy for the Blue
Pacific Continent, and to the Pacific leaders vision of a

prosperous Blue Pacific Continent.

Fellow Leaders,

49.

50.

As a large Ocean State, Fiji is a proud advocate for the United

Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).

Fiji has signed and will ratify the Agreement on Biodiversity
Beyond National Jurisdiction (BBNJ), in the lead-up to the 34

United Nations Oceans Conference in France.

Page 11 of 15
51.

52.

53.

54.

Fiji has ratified the World Trade Organisation (WTO)
Agreement on Fisheries Subsidies, which aims to eliminate
harmful subsidies that contribute to Illegal Unregulated

Unreported fishing.

We call for concerted efforts at the World Trade Organisation,
to finalize Part Two of the Fisheries Subsidies Agreement that

address subsidies to overfishing and overcapacity.

Fiji reiterates the importance of understanding the vast ocean
space, guided by science, and data, in order to undertake risk -

informed decisions.

As the global community prepares for the Climate COP in
Baku, Azerbaijan, we call on countries to work together with
the United Nations to implement the outcomes of the Global

Stock-take undertaken at COP28.

Page 12 of 15
55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

Deep, rapid and sustained reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions in line with 1.5 degrees celcius must be vigorously

pursued, and accelerated.

The phase-out of unabated coal power, transitioning away
from fossil fuels in energy systems will contribute to the

achievement of net zero targets by 2050.

Both adaptation and mitigation financing require a substantial

increase.

We call on States to commit to finalising the new collective
quantified goal (NCQG) and address glaring gaps in climate

finance.

The momentum from COP27 and COP28 on the Loss and
Damage Fund, and the Santiago Network must be
accelerated in order to protect vulnerable communities who
stand to lose the most from the climate crisis, particularly in
Small Island Developing States and Least Developed

Countries.

PUugy wurde
60.

61.

62.

63.

By 2050; around 240 of our coastal communities will be
displaced due to sea-level rise. 42 communities are in urgent

need of relocation.

With the limitations of the multilateral climate financing
architecture, Fiji has established the world’s first national

Relocation Trust Fund to support our relocation costs.

We have issued domestic and international green and blue
bonds, piloted low-cost parametric insurance products for
rural communities, and engaged the private sector in climate

resilience building.

We call on our development partners to support our efforts.

Fellow Leaders,

64.

The Pact of the Future, adopted at the Summit of the Future

earlier this week, opens pathways to new possibilities.

Page 14 of 15
65. The world deserves a future of peace, dignity, and

prosperity. It is never too late!

Mr President, Excellencies,

66. Fiji's commitment to multilateralism is unwavering.

67. We will continue to work closely with the United Nations and

all Member States, to advance efforts towards building a

better, safer and fairer world for all.

Vinaka vakalevu and | thank you

Page 15 of 15
