Permanent Mission of the Federated States of Micronesia to the UN

300 East 42 Street, Suite 1600 Telephone: (212) 697-8370
New York, N.Y. 10017 Facsimile: (212) 697-8295
e-mail: fsmun@fsmgov.org https://unmission.fm/

79" United Nations General Assembly
Item 8: General Debate

Address by H.E. Wesley W. Simina
President of the Federated States of Micronesia

New York, 26 September 2024 Check against delivery

Mr. President,

Mr. Secretary- General,

Excellencies,

Ladies and gentlemen,

On behalf of the people and the government of Micronesia, I extend a warm Kamorale.

Kamorale back home was coined as a national greeting that combines the diverse languages
of all our islands. Kamorale represents the spirit of unity and solidarity that lies at the heart
of my country and people. And that same spirit is equally important in the context of
multilateralism here at the United Nations. In a world where global challenges require
collective action, Kamorale reminds us that our strength and solutions come from our ability
to come together. Just as the four states of Micronesia come together under one banner, our
international community must come together in order to progress the peace, prosperity and
sustainable development we all wish to see as envisioned in the Pact for the Future.

After traveling thousands of miles from Micronesia with my delegation, I am honored to
participate in this 79th Session of the United Nations General Assembly. I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your election as President of the General Assembly, and assure you of my
Delegation’s support for your leadership. I also acknowledge our out-going President of the
78th Session for the impactful work he had carried out during his term. I must also pay
tribute to our Secretary-General, who recently joined us in the Pacific for the Pacific Islands
Forum Leaders Meeting. We deeply appreciate your tireless efforts to strengthen our United
Nations as a vital instrument for achieving our shared goals.

Mr. President,
Since the time Micronesia became a member of the United Nations in September 1991, we
have been grappling with the severe impacts of climate change. I cannot emphasize enough
how it is the single greatest threat to our home. Even as I speak today, we are currently in a
state of emergency due to an extended drought facing my nation. For us, every degree, every
inch of sea-level rise, and every delay matters. We continue to call on our global community
to step up with stronger and urgent action.

Mr. President,

I raise an important topic that relates to our island's ability to adapt to and survive the
increasing impacts of climate change. Time is running out to prevent average global
temperature from surpassing 1.5 degrees. We are already at 1.2, according to the latest
science. The 1.5 degrees goal is the safety limit for our small islands. Beyond that lies a
danger zone with deadly heat that will cost lives, impact our food and water systems, and
will drown many of our low-lying islands.

Carbon Dioxide stays in the atmosphere for hundreds of years. So while it is critical for the
world to cut those emissions, the benefit of those cuts will not be felt until later this century.
We need to control temperatures now. We call upon the larger emitters to prioritize reduction
of the non-CO2 pollutants — especially, methane, fluorinated gasses, and black carbon. The
IPCC and more recent scientific reports explains that this is the only way. I urge all of us to
take greater action now. I call on all parties to the Paris Agreement to include ambitious non-
CO2 goals and measures in their 2025 round of NDCs.

As we take action on non-CO2 pollutants, we also need all countries to come together and
agree on a global plan to transition away from fossil fuels in a fair, just and equitable
manner. In this connection, I am announcing that Micronesia endorses the Fossil Fuel
Nonproliferation Treaty Initiative. We must accelerate all of our efforts to tackle the climate
crisis.

Mr. President,

The health of our ocean is deteriorating , due to effects of climate change and green-house
gas emissions. One of the most hard-hitting issues we are confronted with is sea-level rise. I
am very pleased that the General Assembly is hosting for the first time a high-level meeting
on sea-level rise this week.

Sea-level rise poses a significant threat to the livelihoods, well-being, and security of our
small island nation’s communities and ecosystems. However, this climate crisis does not
jeopardize our statehood or sovereignty, nor does it diminish our rights under international
law. Leaders from the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) and the Alliance of Small Island States
(AOSIS) have affirmed that our maritime zones, as recognized by the UN Convention on the
Law of the Sea, will remain valid despite physical changes due to climate change. We
emphasize that the statehood and sovereignty of PIF and AOSIS members will endure, along

2
with the associated rights and responsibilities, including the protection of our citizens,
regardless of the impacts of sea-level rise.

Mr. President,

The International Seabed Authority (ISA) is currently negotiating its draft exploitation
regulations, and Micronesia is adopting a careful approach on seabed mining. We will
consider all relevant factors regarding this matter, and will join in the Talanoa being
organized this year by the Pacific Islands Forum.

Micronesia joins other nations in emphasizing the necessity of comprehensive knowledge,
data, and scientific understanding of the marine environment and the impacts of deep seabed
mining before any exploitation takes place. We urge the ISA to finalize all relevant
regulations, standards, and guidelines for its Mining Code prior to exploitation. Additionally,
it is crucial that all stakeholders, including adjacent coastal states, Indigenous peoples, and
local communities in the Pacific, are consulted and their perspectives considered before any
exploitation occurs.

Mr. President,

Micronesia is pleased with the adoption of the United Nations BBNJ Agreement. I was the
first leader to sign the BBNJ Agreement here in New York a year ago and among the first to
deposit our instrument of ratification. Currently, over 90 countries have signed.

I urge others to sign and ratify so that we can operationalize the BBNJ agreement. We look
forward to the Preparatory Commission to begin its important work soon.

Mr. President,

The international community is set to adopt a legally binding treaty to end plastic pollution,
including in the marine environment, in Busan, Republic of Korea, later this year. This treaty
must address plastic pollution at its source—plastic production, particularly primary plastic
polymers derived from fossil fuels. Micronesia’s Bridge to Busan Declaration, launched
earlier this year, calls for international support to regulate plastics production in the treaty.
As negotiations near completion, we urge global backing for the Declaration to ensure the
treaty includes strong measures to curb plastic production and tackle both pollution and
climate change. If we do not address the unsustainable production of primary plastic
polymers, then the global goal of ending plastic pollution by 2040 and limiting the average
temperature rise to less than 1.5 degrees celsius cannot be achieved.

Mr. President,

Micronesia plays a vital role in the Pacific Islands Forum 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific
Continent. As part of the large oceanic countries and territories, we are custodians of nearly
20 percent of the Earth's surface, placing immense cultural and spiritual value on our ocean
and land as a shared heritage. Our Leaders' Commitments to 2050 focus on preserving and
protecting our oceans, ensuring a sustainable future for our children. Micronesia is dedicated
to reducing and preventing the causes and impacts of climate change and sea level rise. With
the support of our partners, we are committed to achieving net zero carbon emissions by
2050. We pledge to safeguard the future of our people by protecting our sovereignty,
maritime zones, and resources, especially in the face of climate-induced sea level rise.

Mr. President,

The health of our people is crucial to Micronesia’s nation building. Noncommunicable
Diseases (NCDs) significantly undermine our nation's well-being. NCDs hinder workforce
productivity and contribute to poverty. Unfortunately, the Pacific has some of the highest
rates of these diseases, with Micronesia ranking among the top countries. In 2016, NCDs
accounted for 75% of all deaths in Micronesia. Recognizing this national health emergency,
Micronesia has taken decisive action. Since 1995, we have participated in WHO's "Healthy
Islands" initiative, focusing on health protection, risk reduction, and promoting healthy
lifestyles. We developed a national NCD action plan in 2006, and the Pacific NCD Roadmap
has guided our efforts since 2014. In 2022, we reaffirmed our commitment to securing the
well-being of our people through the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent. Our fight
against NCDs is key to building a healthier, stronger future for Micronesia.

However, despite decades of effort under the Healthy Islands Initiative, NCDs continue to
pose a serious challenge in Micronesia. The persistence of these diseases warrants the need
for renewed support and stronger partnerships. There is an opportunity here to re-evaluate
both the Healthy Islands Initiative and the Pacific NCD Roadmap, exploring ways to enhance
their effectiveness. By working together, we can confront this crisis more robustly and
ensure that we move toward a healthier and more resilient future.

Mr. President,

As we gather today, we are reminded of the importance of global peace and security,
particularly in light of the ongoing conflicts in Ukraine and between Israel and Palestine.
Micronesia reaffirms its unwavering commitment to peace and dialogue. We condemn the
invasion of Ukraine and the killing of innocent civilians.

We also condemn the attack by Hamas on Israeli citizens on October 7th, and we believe that
every nation has the right to defend its people and territory.

We urge for the immediate and safe release of hostages and cessation of hostilities, and urge
all parties to work towards a peaceful resolution. It is our profound hope that both Israel and
Palestine can resume meaningful negotiations, with the goal of establishing two states living
side by side in peace and security, with clear and recognized borders. We commend the
constructive efforts of the United States, Egypt, and Qatar in supporting the peace process,
and we remain hopeful that through diplomacy and cooperation, lasting peace can be
achieved. Micronesia remains committed that the protection of innocent civilians
everywhere, is of paramount importance, as peace can only be sustained when the lives and
dignity of all people are respected.
Mr. President,

Micronesia joins Pacific Island nations in advocating for the establishment of a Special
Representative for Climate, Peace, and Security, emphasizing that climate change is a
significant global security threat. The UN system, particularly the Security Council, must
adapt to address the challenges posed by the climate crisis in a comprehensive and
coordinated manner. Currently, the Council struggles to effectively tackle major peace and
security issues, highlighting the need for comprehensive reform. This reform should make
the Council more effective, inclusive, transparent, and accountable. It must reflect the
realities of today rather than those of 1945. It is time for permanent membership of the
Security Council to be expanded to include Japan, India, Germany, Brazil and representation
from the African continent.

Additionally, it is crucial to amplify the voices of under-represented regions, such as Small
Island Developing States, in a reformed Council.

Mr. President,

In today's complex global landscape, strengthening the multilateral system for an inclusive,
interdisciplinary UN is essential. Support for multi-country offices that represent the UN on
the ground must be reinforced to assist vulnerable nations in fully implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Additionally, the coordination role of Resident
Coordinators should be supported and strengthened.

For Small Island Developing States, our reliance on stable international assistance for
development cannot be overstated. We need sustainable financing from donor partners and
international financial institutions (IFIs). It is no surprise that SIDS have led the charge for a
more inclusive global financial architecture. The recently adopted Multi- Vulnerability Index
(MVI) is a crucial tool, providing a comprehensive understanding of the unique challenges
faced by SIDS. The next step is to implement the MVI in a way that addresses our specific
needs.

Mr. President,

The special case of SIDS in the context of climate change and sustainable development and
our particular vulnerability to natural disasters and external shocks must be supported by an
increase in climate finance and investment, including new and additional climate finance.
We call on developed countries to fulfill their commitments in this regard.

Mr. President,

Gender equality is vital for nation building and effective governance. By acceding to the
Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW),
Micronesia has committed to achieving gender parity. We have also endorsed the Pacific
Leaders Gender Equality Declaration and established a national gender policy. Strengthening
gender equality is a priority within my administration, and I have nominated more women to

5
key roles, including my Cabinet, to address the imbalance in government. In a historic
achievement, three women were recently elected to Congress, marking a significant
milestone for representation. With these steps, Micronesia is moving towards a stronger and
more inclusive future.

Mr. President,

Today, we stand at a critical crossroads, where the future of our planet rests in the hands of
our youth. It is not enough to speak of change; we must empower the next generation to lead
it. Our young people are the innovators, the visionaries, and the problem-solvers who will
carry the torch of climate action and global justice. But they cannot do it alone. We must
invest in their education and well-being, nurture their leadership and character. We must give
them the tools to build a resilient, sustainable world. As leaders we must ensure that our
youth are not the inheritors of a a dying planet, but are the co-architects of its transformation.

In closing, Mr. President —

The challenges we face—from climate change to conflict, from the health of our oceans to
the well-being of our people—demand urgent and unified action. Let us not be discouraged
by the magnitude of the tasks before us, but instead be inspired by the opportunity we have to
reshape our world for the better. The spirit of Kamorale teaches us that strength lies in unity,
and in that spirit, I call on every nation represented here to act decisively, with courage and
compassion. Let us work together with resolve, and prioritize the protection of our planet,
our people, and our future.

The time for action is now. Let this Assembly be remembered not for words spoken but for
deeds done, for promises kept, and for the lasting legacy we leave for generations to come.
AS we were so rightly reminded of at the opening of the Summit of the Future by the youth
representative from South Sudan — the future is for the youth to forge - not for us to cling on
to.

Micronesia is ready to play its part, and I urge all of you to join us in this collective effort so
that together we can build a world where peace, prosperity, and sustainability are not just
aspirations, but realities for all.

As enshrined in the preamble of our FSM Constitution:

“Our ancestors, who made their homes on these islands, displaced no other people. We, who
remain, wish no other home than this. Having known war, we hope for peace. Having been
divided, we wish unity. Having been ruled, we seek freedom...We extend to all nations what
we seek from each: peace, friendship, cooperation, and love in our common humanity.”

I thank you and I leave with you KAMORALE.
