STATEMENT
BY
H.E. MR. ADAMA BARROW
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF
THE GAMBIA
AT THE
GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 79TH SESSION
OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

SEPTEMBER 2024

O|Page
President of the 79th Session of the UN General
Assembly,

Secretary General, Mr. Antonio Guterres,

Your Majesties and Excellencies, Heads of State
and Government,

Heads of Delegation,

Distinguished Delegates,

Ladies and Gentlemen,

It is an honour for The Gambia to participate in
the 79th Session of the United Nations
General Assembly and to engage in meaningful
dialogue with global leaders and partners on the
vision of shaping a more prosperous future for
humankind.

Your Excellency, Mr. President,
Allow me to express my heartfelt congratulations

to you on your assuming the role of President for
the 79th Session.

1|Page
I similarly wish to register sincere gratitude to His
Excellency, Ambassador Dennis Francis for his
exemplary leadership and accomplishments
during the 78th Session.

Mr. President,

As we undertake to chart the future we envision,
we welcome the initiative presented by Secretary-
General Guterres at the Summit of the Future
under the theme: “Multilateral Solutions for a
Better Tomorrow.”

My delegation firmly believes that the path to a
better tomorrow lies in multilateralism and closer
international cooperation. Through our collective
responsibility and inclusive participation, we can
decisively confront and overcome our challenges
and bottlenecks.

2|Page
The high-level ‘Summit of the Future’ has
determined that human actions are largely
responsible for the challenges we face today;
therefore, it is within our power to ably address
the disasters that continuously trouble our
nations.

To succeed, however, the international
community must recommit to implementing the
resolutions of the Summit of the Future to tackle
such critical global challenges as climate change,
poverty, transnational crimes, and conflict.

These incidents underscore the urgent need for
comprehensive reforms within the United
Nations system, particularly the UN Security
Council and the International Financial
Institutions.

We must equally strive for a more representative,
just, and inclusive United Nations to shape the
world we so dearly want.

3|Page
Mr. President,

The Gambia’s perspective on the
theme: “Leaving no one behind: Acting together
for the advancement of peace, sustainable
development, and human dignity for present and
future generations,” aligns closely with the
principles and aspirations of Agenda 2030 for
sustainable development.

In accordance with the principles of the United
Nations Charter, the theme serves as a crucial
reminder to the international community of the
need for solidarity and renewed commitment.

With specific reference to The Gambia, the
framework of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) is central to our national agenda,
and we are committed to ensuring that our

4|Page
development efforts are both sustainable and
impactful.

Like many Least Developed Countries (LDCs),
The Gambia faces huge challenges that pose
serious threats to our survival as a nation, hence
requiring collective international efforts to
resolve.

Consequently, the global community needs to
assist the Least Developed Countries, especially
to address the burden of inequality, build more
robust economies, and create policy space for
economic growth. To tackle the debt burden and
internal state weaknesses, we need to increase
investment in capacity building.

Also, we must jointly endeavour to bridge the
digital divide and support technology transfer to
advance development.

Mr. President,

5|Page
We live in a world with widening inequalities,
thus suppressing the weak and making the
conditions of the poor worse grossly violates the
expressed ideals and spirit of the Summit of the
Future.

The Gambia is fully committed to the global call
for gender equality and _ recognises the
indispensable role women play in_ socio-
economic development. We firmly believe that
empowering women translates into community
empowerment and, ultimately, inclusive
development.

For these reasons, my government places great
emphasis on women’s rights, and we are
dedicated to protecting and empowering
women. As President, I will continue to ensure
that women and girls are protected and given the

6|Page
necessary space to contribute meaningfully to our
national development agenda.

On youth matters, at a recent consultative
summit, stakeholders recommended a sharper
focus on Innovation and Climate Change, Gender
Equity, Bridging the Digital Divide, and Global
Governance that promotes youth empowerment
through employment, education, and health.

The Summit recommendations will inform
endeavours to fill policy gaps and expand funding
opportunities for better youth engagement.

Furthermore, my government commits to
aligning our national priorities with global
benchmarks and, in partnership with youth-led
organisations and other stakeholders, we also
resolve to use transformative solutions to create
greater opportunities for all.

7|Page
Mr. President,

The Gambia believes in collective international
efforts to combat global challenges. Based on
this, last year, The Gambia joined the
international community by co-sponsoring UN
General Assembly consensus resolution 77/276,
which sought to engage the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) on the obligations of States
regarding climate change.

Last August, The Gambia submitted its written
statement to the ICJ, and we look forward to
participating in the oral hearings later this year in
The Hague.

At the national level, The Gambia remains
steadfast in its commitment to promoting human

8| Page
rights and establishing a vibrant democratic
environment.

The establishment of a National Human Rights
Commission and entrenchment of a free,
independent, and impartial judiciary provide a
solid framework and a sense of security for our
citizens, thus ensuring they have a place to seek
redress for injustice.

Iam happy to report that, since 2017, The Gambia
has neither recorded a single political prisoner,
nor has any journalist or human rights activist
been jailed.

Proudly too, in August 2024, The Gambia was
recognised as one of Africa’s leading defenders
of freedom of expression and ranked third in
Article 19’s Global Expression Report 2024. We
will continue striving to better our situation.

Mr. President,

9|Page
As committed advocates of peace and security,
respect for basic rights and freedoms, and the
application of international law, we stand firmly
against injustice, no matter where it occurs. No
doubt, as a nation of peace, guided by democratic
principles, we have learned valuable lessons to
act upon and share.

With the help of the international community, we
are steadily taking steps to bring closure to the
saga of the victims of dictatorship in our country.
So far, we have successfully managed the
Transitional Justice and Reform processes.
Moving forward, we count on your support in the
next critical stages of ensuring justice,
reconciliation, and reparation, where necessary.

The Gambia will continue advocating preventive

approaches to peacebuilding to avert future
conflicts.

10|Page
Once again, I take this opportunity to express our
appreciation of all the support the UN Peace-
building Commission has been extending to us.

Mr. President,

The ongoing conflicts in Palestine, Sudan, the
Sahel, Ukraine and Russia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Libya, and other conflict
zones demand the international community’s
immediate intervention.

We must explore all diplomatic means to restore
lasting peace worldwide and free all innocent
people, particularly women and children, from
the calamities of war.

We call on the international community to
prioritise support for the _ post-conflict
reconstruction of Gaza and the improvement of
economic conditions in the West Bank. Even
though the situation in that region is extremely

11|Page
serious, the intense destruction of lives and
property continues.

The Israeli occupation, expansion of settlements,
blockade of Gaza, and restrictions in the West
Bank, together with the threat of intensifying the
war to a regional conflict, continue to worsen the
ongoing tensions in the Middle East.

Accordingly, I call on the United Nations, the
international community, and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) Member States to join
forces and urgently bring about permanent peace
in Palestine.

Through recognised structures, I am, as Chair of
the OIC, committed to stepping up efforts and
exploring every possible diplomatic and peaceful
channel to resolve the Middle East crisis.

12|Page
The OIC has been very active and, under my
leadership, will continue to promote and pursue
peace in that region. Our common objective is to
create a situation wherein Israel and Palestine
coexist in peace and security under a two-state
arrangement and within the recognised pre- 1967
borders.

With the sustained support of the OIC, The
Gambia has stood as a beacon of hope for the
oppressed Rohingya Muslims of Myanmar.
Despite relentless efforts over the past five (5)
years, the oppressive regime in Myanmar has
intensified its oppressive campaign through
forced exile and unspeakable acts of violence.

During my current three-year tenure as OIC
Chairman, my office will be available also for
dialogue to bring lasting, peaceful relations
between Iran, its immediate neighbours, and our
Western partners.

13|Page
Globally, we have the collective responsibility of
acting speedily to peacefully address the situation
in Palestine, Sudan, Ukraine, and the Sahel
region.

Mr. President,

We commend the efforts of the Kingdom of
Morocco and the viability of the Moroccan
Autonomy Initiative. The Initiative aligns with
the principles of the UN Charter, and it provides
a platform for all parties involved in the
Moroccan Sahara conflict to engage in a UN-led
dialogue for a permanent, mutually agreed
political solution.

With regard to recognition and respect for the
One China Principle, we continue to stand with
China. The People's Republic of China represents
renewed hope for global rebalancing towards
justice, peace, and development. China’s

14|Page
generous support to its southern neighbours,
through its numerous development cooperation
initiatives, has proven usefully impactful and
strategic.

Mr. President,

Migration has ever been a fundamental aspect of
human development and it — significantly
contributes to the growth of both home and host
countries.

The international community should address
migration in a_ regulated manner = and
decriminalise it. Indeed, human beings should not
risk losing their lives in pursuit of a better future.

In this regard, The Gambia Government is
collaborating with relevant countries to improve
the plight of migrants. Although we must
discourage irregular migration, we are duty-

15|Page
bound to respect the rights of migrants and ensure
they are treated with dignity.

Mr. President,

We recognise that dictatorship, conflict, climate
change, poverty, and lack of opportunities are
part of the root causes of migration. Economic
sanctions imposed on States also contribute to
forced migration. The long-standing USS.
embargo against Cuba is an example.

My view is that this embargo should give way to
renewed good neighbourliness and cooperative
relations between the two nations.

The international community should address
inequality with compassion and fulfil the
commitment to the official development
assistance pledge made by donor countries. As
regards the original countries of migrants, we

16|Page
must uphold the ideals and principles of
democracy, good governance, and wise resource
management approaches.

Mr. President,

In conclusion, the international community must
prioritise diplomacy, dialogue, and mutual
understanding, as we confront challenges of
global concern. I also urge the private sector to
collaborate with our governments in taking
concrete action towards our common goals.

Simple yet impactful steps, such as supporting
local initiatives, promoting inclusive policies,
and engaging in global partnerships, can make a
significant difference in the world order.

Despite the challenges we face, there is immense

potential for positive change through collective
endeavours.

17|Page
Let us embrace a message of hope, resilience, and
optimism for the future. Together, we can create
a world where peace, sustainable development,
and human dignity are not mere dreams but a
reality for all.

Thank you.

18|Page
