REPUBLIC OF GUINEA-BISSAU

STEMENT OF

H.E. UMARO SISSOCO EMBALO
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF GUINEA-BISSAU

GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 79TH SESSION
OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

(September 25" 2024)

Mr. President,

Mr. Secretary-General,

Your excellencies, Heads of State and Government.
Ladies and gentlemen,

| would like to offer my congratulations to Mr. Philemon Yang of the Republic of
Cameroon on his election as President of the 79th Session of the United
Nations General Assembly. | wish him much success in a very complex

international environment.

| also congratulate his predecessor, Mr. Dennis Francis, for the results achieved

during his term.

To Secretary-General Antoénio Guterres, | express our acknowledgement of his
deep commitment to the service of our common ideals and goals in a very

difficult international landscape.

The world faces grave challenges. The obligation to follow the principles and
deliver on the promisses of the United Nations Charter is the burden that each

one of us carries.

We witness devastating wars, the intensification of regional tensions, and other
grave threats to international peace and security. Hundreds of millions of people
continue to live in extreme poverty, without the basic means of subsistence,

without hope for a better future, without human dignity.

Implementing reforms in global economic and financial governance to make it
more just, inclusive, and equitable has become even more urgent. This is the

only way to build adequate responses to the challenges that humanity faces.

We must fight more efficiently against poverty and social exclusion through
concrete actions. Specifically, we must strive to finance development programs,
reduce inequalities, protect the environment and mitigate the effects of climate
change.
Mr. President,

Eight decades after the establishment of the UN in 1945, we live today in a
totally different world. We continue to call for reform of the United Nations
Security Council, which must consider the interests of Africa under the terms of
the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union.

We must reform the international financial architecture in order to promote
greater inclusion, particularly in Africa, and to consider the African continent’s

role and contribution to the world economy.

In this context, we welcome the Summit of the Future. We hope that the
“Compact for the Future” can drive collective efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and “Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want” of the
African Union.

As a member of the Global Working Group on Social Protection for Nutrition,
Human Capital, and Local Economic Development of the Group of Seven Plus
(G7+), we will work together with the other distinguished members on
erradicating hunger and progressively achieving all Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs).

Mr. President,

In the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, we are commited to fostering dialogue,
national reconciliation, consolidation of democracy, and the Rule of Law, as well

as our country’s sustainable development.

Despite the negative impact of the challenging world economic and financial
situation, the economy of Guinea-Bissau continues to grow as a result of sound
public policies. The practice of accountability has provided greater transparency

in the State’s economic and financial management.
We have adopted measures that, though difficult, were shown to be necessary
to drive the private sector and to create a more solid foundation for a dynamic

and inclusive economy.

We are promoting greater participation of women and youth entrepreneurs. We
are investing on the building and improvement of basic infrastructure, such as

roads and other projects.

We declared war on corruption and organized crime. We were able to restore
trust in our relations with international financial institutions and other bilateral

and multilateral partners.

We continue to place faith in strengthening Guinea-Bissau’s bonds of friendship
and cooperation with the world. We remain steadfast on the policy of
peacebuilding and peaceful resolution of conflicts in West Africa and in the
world in general. It was to this end that, in recent months, | made visits of
friendship and work to Russia, Ukraine, Israel, and Palestine.

In this context, | reiterate my call for an end to the unjust and very harmful
embargo that our brothers and sisters in Cuba have been subjected to for
decades.

Mr. President,
Distinguished Heads of State and Government,
Ladies and gentlemen,

| recently had the honor of serving Africa as President of the African Leaders
Malaria Alliance. We made significant progress in a very difficult world
environment. We endeavored to garner support to replenish the Global Fund.

We worked with the private sector to promote the production of drugs and nets
to combat malaria. We encouraged the transfer of technologies to African
companies. We launched End Malaria Councils and Funds and supported youth

movements against malaria.
Despite all the progress achieved, challenges persist. In the next three years,
ALMA will run a 1.5 billion dollar deficit. Global warming and rains associated
with climate change are expanding the geographic reach of mosquitos, thus
exposing more than 170 million people to the threat of malaria in the African
continent.

| take this opportunity to congratulate the Executive Secretariat of ALMA for
their remarkable service. | also thank all of ALMA’s partners for their crucial

support in the fight against malaria during my term in office.

Mr. President,
Ladies and gentlemen,

In closing, on behalf of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, | would like to reaffirm
our determination to continue to contribute to strengthening the friendship
among countries and peoples, to promote international cooperation,
multilateralism, the peaceful resolution of conflicts, the end to wars and
suffering of innocent populations, toward peace in the world.

Thank you
