ee

Address by His Excellency Dr. Mohamed Irfaan Ali,
President of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana, to the
79th Session of the General Assembly of the United
Nations

25 September 2024

Mr President,

| congratulate you on your election as President of the 79th
Session of the General Assembly. | also thank His Excellency
Dennis Francis of Trinidad and Tobago for his presidency of the

last session.

Mr President, Excellencies
If itis, we all agree on ending and preventing wars;

If itis, we all agree that the Security Council requires reform;
If itis, we all agree that the international financial system is unfair

and unjust to the developing world; and

If it is we all believe in climate, food and energy security; then

what is stopping us from acting!

We will all be doomed in the court of conscience for knowing

what is right while ignoring what is wrong.

Mr. President

Of the myriad challenges confronting our world, climate change
threatens our very existence, adversely affecting development

across all countries.

Rising sea levels and temperatures, severe natural disasters,
and shifting and extreme weather patterns disrupt agriculture
and food security, threaten water supply, and displace
communities. These impacts are particularly devastating for

small island developing states.
Each year, we make the annual pilgrimage to COP, filled with
hope for tangible outcomes. And each year we are regaled with

renewed unkept promises.

This cycle of hope followed by disappointment cannot continue
if the Sustainable Development Goals are to be met. We must
break free from this pattern of empty pledges. We must,
unequivocally and immediately, fulfil all pledges for the sake of

our planet and the future of all its inhabitants.

Let me tell you about my country, Guyana; a country that is
83,000 square miles, 86 percent of which is tropical forest.
Guyana has the second highest percentage forest cover on earth
and one of the lowest deforestation rates. Our forest stores 19.5

gigatons of carbon and sequesters 153 million tons annually.
According to WWF, Guyana is one of the world’s most important
countries for biodiversity density. It straddles two of the richest
biodiversity zones, the Guiana Shield and the Amazon. As a
country, we are dedicated to the preservation of this vital global
asset. | especially salute the Indigenous Peoples of Guyana, the
Amerindians, who are the foremost stewards of this great natural
heritage. We recognise their leadership and 15% of all revenues
earned from carbon sales are directly transferred to our

Indigenous communities.

Mr. President

Even with our new-found natural resource - oil and gas, it would
require less than 20 percent of sequestered carbon to offset our
emissions at maximum output. We have preserved our
biodiversity and know its value. We believe it is only fair and just

that this global asset be monetized in a fair carbon market.

Today, | am pleased to announce the launch of a Global
Biodiversity Alliance. We will convene the first Global

Biodiversity Alliance Summit in 2025 which will focus on -

4
e Creating a market for biodiversity credits,

e Scaling biodiversity conservation debt swaps,

e Accelerating biodiversity bonds,

e Establishing a blueprint for biodiversity taxonomies, and

e Promoting nature positive action

We do not make this announcement by mere words. Guyana is
also committed to doubling its protected areas by December
2025 and achieving the global biodiversity target of 30% by

2030.

These are real solutions that Guyana is putting forward to
address the global problem of biodiversity loss. We do not

lecture; we lead by example without arrogance.

Mr. President,

Alt paragraph - According to the UN Food Security and Nutrition

Report, in 2023, an estimated 28.9% of the global population,

5
2.3billion people were moderately or severely insecure. The
primary causes were conflict and insecurity, extreme weather
events, including those related to El Nifio, and climate change

and economic shocks.

To effectively address food insecurity, we must take more
concerted action to address its root causes: reducing conflict,
mitigating climate change, and enhancing food production and
trade in food commodities. By prioritizing peace and climate
action, we can create environments where food systems, crops
and livelihoods are not threatened by conflict and weather
extremes. In turn, enhancing food production and ensuring fair
and efficient trade in food commodities can reduce food

insecurity. So too, can the full involvement of women and youth.

In Guyana’s national agriculture policy, at least 35% of our agro

businesses will be owned by women and 60% by young people.
While | have spoken of food insecurity, the global malnutrition
rates are also alarming and must be addressed. Nutritious, safe

and sufficient food are crucial to a healthy population.

Mr. President

The United Nations must continue to be a beacon of hope

amidst a turbulent global environment.

The theme of this year’s Assembly — “Leaving no one behind:
acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable
development, and human dignity for present and future
generations” — resonates with the vision set out in the United

Nations Charter.

This vision demands decisive action and_ enlightened

multilateralism.

Today, we find ourselves in a world where the quest for peace is
met with the defiant echo of conflict, where the promise of

sustainable development is eclipsed by the dangerous spectre
of climate change and food insecurity, and where the dignity of

millions of people is trampled upon with impunity.

In Ukraine, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of anation are
being violated. Yet, decisive action by the United Nations
Security Council remains fettered by the veto. Justice demands
that we defend the territorial integrity of all States — large, small,

powerful and weak.

Equally concerning is the conflict in Sudan which rages on with
devastating consequences for the people of that country,
including famine and mass displacement. This conflict will
continue to undermine efforts to achieve lasting peace and

sustainable development.

This Assembly must also condemn the continued oppression
and persecution by the Taliban of women and girls in Afghanistan

who face, not just lack of access to education and restrictions on
their movements, but now even their voices cannot be heard in

public.

Closer to my home, CARICOM has been actively supporting a
Haitian-led process for the restoration of democracy, peace and
stability in Haitii We welcome the deployment of the UN
authorized Multinational Security Support Mission, led by Kenya,
as a crucial step towards stabilizing the security situation. We
call on the international community to urgently scale up financing
for the MSS and secure its renewed authorization so that the

Mission can succeed.

We must also address the dire humanitarian situation where
almost half of Haiti’s population suffers from acute hunger, mass
displacement, and women and girls are enduring brutal violence,

including sexual violence.

Guyana is leading CARICOM’s efforts in mobilizing humanitarian
support for Haiti. Excellencies, | will be reaching out to you for

your support. We must stay the course with our Haitian brothers
and sisters in their quest for durable peace and sustainable

development. The people of Haiti deserve nothing less.
Mr. President,

Peace, stability and safety are no more imperilled than in Gaza.
Guyana reiterates its strong condemnation of the October 7
attacks by Hamas on Israel. However, the collective punishment
of an entire population, including the indiscriminate slaughter of
civilians, most of whom are women and children, has long gone

beyond the realm of self-defence.

As the world watches on helplessly, Israel continues to flout its
international obligations, including the orders of the ICJ and
successive Security Council resolutions. Instead, the right of
self-defence is being used as a weapon of mass extermination,
stoking legitimate fears of genocide.No State, large or small,
should feel comfortable and safe when such atrocities are

allowed to continue with impunity.

10
The war in Gaza must end now. We reiterate our demand for an
immediate ceasefire and the release of all hostages and

Palestinians illegally detained.
Mr. President

For more than 75 years the Palestinian people have been denied
their inalienable right to self-determination. We must advance
the two-State solution as this remains the only viable option for
a future where Palestinians and Israelis live in peace and

security.

Turning to our brothers and sisters in Cuba, their right to
development continues to be stymied by the economic embargo.
Guyana renews its call for revocation of the embargo and the

removal of Cuba from the list of State sponsors of terrorism.
Mr. President

The United Nations has a special responsibility for the security
of small states. Small States look to multilateralism and the rule

of international law to protect them from foreign aggression.

11
Guyana is a small State that has had to contend with aggression
from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela for all 58 years of our
nationhood. International law and its strict application have been
our armour and our shield in our determination to protect

ourselves from this aggression.

We remind this august Assembly that the border between
Guyana and Venezuela was fully, finally and perfectly settled in
an 1899 award by an international tribunal. Venezuela was fully
represented in that tribunal whose award it proclaimed in its own
Congress and welcomed for more than six decades, before
reopening the issue on the eve of Guyana’s independence,

claiming two-thirds of our territory.

This controversy, initiated by Venezuela, was submitted by
Guyana to the International Court of Justice (the ICJ) in
accordance with a decision of the United Nations Secretary
General and consistent with our position to settle this matter by

legal and peaceful means.

12
In 2023, in light of intensified acts of aggression by Venezuela,

the ICJ issued provisional measures stating that:

“Pending a final decision in the case, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela shall refrain from taking any
action which would modify the situation that currently
prevails in the territory in dispute, whereby the Co-
operative Republic of Guyana administers and

exercises contro! over that area”.

After years of refusing to participate in the proceedings of the ICJ
and stating that it does not recognize the jurisdiction of the Court,
the Venezuelan government has now submitted a counter

memorial to Guyana’s submission.

We welcome Venezuela’s decision to participate in the Court's
proceedings, and express the hope that Venezuela will accept

the decision of the Court, as Guyana has long pledged to do.

13
| reaffirm Guyana’s unwavering commitment to a peaceful
resolution of this long-standing controversy in full conformity with
international law and the principles set forth in the United Nations

Charter.

Mr. President,

Peace, development and human rights are pillars of the United
Nations. We all aspire for a form of multilateralism that is
equitable, inclusive, and ensures that no one is left behind.
Women’s participation and leadership in private and public

sectors are integral to this.

There is a growing movement in the developing world calling for
the democratization of global political and economic relations.
The disproportionate concentration of power favours a few
powerful nations while marginalizing the voices and concerns of

the broader international community.

14
Developing countries are justly demanding more inclusive and
representative decision-making processes in institutions and
organs such as the UN Security Council, the World Bank, and
the IMF. The World Trade Organization must also be reformed to
ensure fairer trade for developing countries. These reforms must
go beyond fair representation and ensure that the policies and
practices of these institutions align with the developmental needs

and aspirations of all countries.

In this emerging global order, we must ensure the United Nations
remains at the forefront of global governance. If multilateralism
is to trump unilateralism, the UN’s role, as the world’s foremost
multilateral organization, is pivotal. With the necessary
resources and resolve, the UN can ensure a future of peace,

sustainable development, and human dignity.

The future we seek—a future where no one is left behind—
demands courageous action. The UN must fulfil its role as the

custodian of greater global peace, the foremost promoter of

15
sustainable development and an unflinching protector of human
rights, human dignity and international law. And since the UN is
all of us - this body of Nations, this is a collective responsibility

for us all.

Let us not be found wanting. Let us act together, for the
advancement of peace, for the achievement of sustainable
development, and for the preservation of human dignity, now and

for generations to come.

| thank you.

16
