CROATIA

Statement by

HE. Mr. Andrej Plenkovié
Prime Minister of the Republic of Croatia

at

79th Session of the United Nations General Assembly
General Debate

New York, 27 September 2024

- Check against delivery -

PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
820 SECOND AVE, 19. FL, NEW YORK, NY 100171 TEL: 212 986 1585 | FAX: 212 986 2011 | CROMISS.UN@MVEP.HR
Mister President (Philemon Yang),
Excellencies,
Distinguished Ladies and Gentleman,

. Today, we stand united in the face of unprecedented global challenges.

. From the proliferation of conflicts and deteriorating geopolitical situation to
climate crises and food insecurity, the world is at a critical juncture where every
nation, regardless of its size, plays a vital role.

° Croatia’s journey over the past 34 years has been a testament to resilience
and determination.

. Emerging from conflict and building a modern, progressive state, we have
positioned ourselves as active contributors on the global stage.

. As we convene here, Croatia brings not just its experience but a deep
commitment to fostering peace, advancing sustainable development, and upholding
human rights as fundamental values rooted in our history.

PEACE AND SECURITY
Ladies and gentlemen,

. We live in a world increasingly ablaze.

. As a country that has endured conflict and the painful process of post-war
recovery, Croatia understands first-hand the value of peace, security, and
international solidarity.

. Our journey from a nation affected by aggression to a contributor to global
peace efforts equips us with a unique perspective.

° The lessons we have learned — about resilience, reconciliation, and the
importance of upholding international law — shape our commitment to promoting
peace and security worldwide.
. In a world facing intensifying crises, from Ukraine to Gaza and Sudan,
Croatia stands firm in its belief that every nation has the right to self-determination
and protection under the UN Charter.

° The Russian Federation’s brutal aggression against Ukraine continues well
into its third year, trampling all tenets of international law.

° While Ukrainian civilians continue to die and suffer, the largest active
nuclear power plant in Europe is also at risk.

. This undermines all principles of nuclear safety and may bring about
catastrophic consequences with cross-border impact.

. All Member States of the United Nations have the right to be independent
and their people must be free to choose their own path.

° They must not depend on their neighbour’s permission, nor should they be
left alone to succumb to a neighbour’s military aggression.

. In that vein, we will not tire in our support to Ukrainian sovereignty and
territorial integrity and in our assistance, and we call upon all to do the same.

° At the same time, the looming threat of a wider conflict in the Middle East is
evident.

° The heinous terrorist attack on Israel on 7 October horrified us.

. So did the unspeakable, continued tragedy since endured by the Palestinian
civilian population in Gaza, where tens of thousands were killed, wounded or
maimed.

. Whatever historical or present grievances, continuing down this path will not

bring a lasting resolution — only more death and destruction.
. We call for the immediate and unconditional release of all remaining
hostages and on both sides to engage in genuine negotiations to end hostilities and
prevent further escalation.

. The Middle East and its people deserve a better future. The rest of the world
as well.

. The wars in Ukraine and Gaza are overshadowing the immense humanitarian
and civilian catastrophe unfolding in Sudan.

. This is even more alarming considering the context of increasing
fragmentation of the security architecture in many parts of the African continent.

. Reversing this trend should be seen as a priority by all of us.
. We must not leave Africa behind. A continent where half of the population is

younger than 19 should and must be seen as a source of hope for humanity, not as
an afterthought.

. The UN Charter is not just another document we can simply and easily
replace.

. The world’s constitution must be upheld more than ever before.

. Reinvigoration of effective multilateralism with the UN in its centre must not

be reduced to a phrase we use on occasions like this.

. In the same vein, we must not falter when it comes to strengthening
international arms control, disarmament and the non-proliferation architecture.

. This is essential not just to avoid conflict, instability or even greater
tragedies, but to reduce the already heightened risks of escalations — either
deliberate or as a result of a misunderstanding.
. Extremist and terrorist groups and their affiliates continue to pose a severe
threat around the world, leaving no society safe.

. Their continued expansion in various regions and the increasing level of
violence they resort to only remind us that countering and preventing terrorism
requires long-term commitment as well as continued, coordinated efforts of the
entire international community.

PEACEBUILDING

Ladies and gentlemen,

. As a country that proudly hosted, supported, and enabled the success of the
United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia (UNTAES),
rightly considered by many as the most successful peacekeeping mission in the
history of the United Nations, and which managed to join NATO just a decade after
the departure of the last UN peacekeeper, Croatia knows all too well the meaning
of peacebuilding, its significance, and the efforts it requires.

. As this year’s Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and last
year's chair, Croatia supports strengthening the links between the three pillars of the
UN — peace and security, development and human rights.

. There is no peace without sustainable development and no sustainable
development without peace.

. There is little time left to strengthen our focus on prevention - at all levels.

. For the Peacebuilding Commission it means to focus more on structural
prevention through national prevention strategies, and operational prevention — by
sending flexible civilian missions upon a country’s request.

. The 2025 Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture will be a crucial moment
to strengthen the PBC and to broaden its mandate to give it some decision-making
powers. You can count on Croatia’s active participation to share its experience and
in view of its candidature to be again a member of the PBC in 2026.
. Croatia is also proud that today, a Croatian company is a global leader in
robotic demining, and we are actively supporting Ukraine by providing our
expertise to assist in the clearance of mines and unexploded ordnance in conflict-
affected areas.

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, CLIMATE, DIGITAL

Ladies and gentlemen,

. Croatia’s commitment to sustainable development is deeply rooted in its
unique position as one of the most biodiverse and nature-rich countries in Europe.

. Often referred to as the "Nature Park of Europe," Croatia has long recognized
the importance of preserving its natural resources.

. Our achievements in renewable energy, where we rank among the top in the
EU, and our strong performance in meeting the UN’s Sustainable Development
Goals, reflect a national strategy that balances economic growth and social stability
with environmental stewardship.

. As we stand at the crossroads of environmental crises and digital
transformation, Croatia's experience offers valuable insights into how we can
harness innovation while protecting our planet for future generations.

. The path we take today will determine our future tomorrow.
° Therefore, we must choose it wisely.
. Croatia, in its national development strategy until 2030, espoused a vision of

a competitive, innovative and safe country with a recognizable identity and culture,
a country with preserved resources, quality living conditions and equal
opportunities for all.

. We have built our strategy on the three main, interrelated development
pillars: digital transformation, decarbonisation and demographic revitalization.
. The digital transformation of our societies is inevitably changing our way of
life and our way of doing business, more rapidly and intensively than any transition
in the last century.

. We are transforming our state and public administration, businesses and
society and half of our population is using e-Citizen portal. ,

° Croatia’s IT industry is competitive and booming.

. At the same time, while new and emerging technologies are unlocking great
potential, they also come with risks.

° To manage these, we need effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at
all levels, as well as informed citizens.

. My Government will continue with policies which promote this path.

. Humanity's greatest challenge of the 21st century is climate change, coupled
with loss of biodiversity, reduction of food and natural resources, increase in the
number of droughts, fires and floods, as well as the acceleration of sea level rise.

. Croatia is located in the Mediterranean, one of the world’s regions expected
to be hit hardest by climate change. It is not by accident that Croatia got a portfolio
for the Mediterranean in the new EU Commission.

. This summer we saw record breaking heat waves followed by torrential rains
in our part of Europe only last week.

. The green transition is therefore pivotal for us all.

. Promoting nature-based solutions is one of our main national tools for
climate change adaptation and mitigation.

. For this reason, we need to strengthen the multilateral system of dealing with
climate, biodiversity and sustainable development. We need to put more efforts in

6
dealing with climate as a threat amplifier that endangers security and stability of
many regions and countries in the world, especially in Africa.

. Croatia spares no efforts to integrate the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable
Development Goals in our national policies, initiatives and strategies and into the
reinforced and reformed global governing structure.

. We are proud that our reforms and investments have earned Croatia a high
8th place among 193 UN Member States according to the 2024 Sustainable
Development Report.

. Finally, for Croatia, all these measures culminate also in demographic
revitalization as another key national priority.

° We consider it an indispensable element of our resilience, competitiveness,
and a prerequisite for successful, sustainable growth.

HUMAN RIGHTS AND HUMANITARIAN SEGMENT

Ladies and Gentlemen,

° Croatia’s deep commitment to human rights stems from its own difficult
experiences under totalitarian regimes and the horrors of the aggression during the
Homeland War.

. The violations of fundamental rights that we endured as a nation have shaped
our understanding of the importance of protecting human dignity, justice, and
equality.

. Croatia's journey from a war-torn country to a strong advocate for human
rights in the international arena has given us a unique perspective on the necessity
of upholding these principles.

° With this background, Croatia remains steadfast in its dedication to
promoting human rights, preventing atrocities, and providing humanitarian
assistance to those in need, both at home and abroad.
. The 2030 Agenda sets out a vision for sustainable development grounded in
international human rights standards, promoting one of the main values of the UN
Charter — to leave no one behind.

. Only through respect for human rights can we achieve a more peaceful, equal
and sustainable world.

. Croatia will continue to champion this cause.

. As a country still searching for 1792 missing persons from the Homeland
war, Croatia spares no efforts to end the anguish of uncertainty for their families.

. We shall never cease the search for them and we shall never stop demanding

answers from those who know their fate.

. We contribute by sharing our acquired expertise with interested countries and
by advocating for the missing persons everywhere in the world, in our national
capacity, and as a committed member of the Global Alliance for the Missing.

. Croatia is today extending its support to Ukraine by offering its expertise in
prosecuting war crimes and making its seasoned experts available to assist Ukraine
in navigating the complex process of accountability and justice, drawing from its
own experience in addressing the aftermath of war crimes committed during the
Homeland War.

. Committed to eradicating domestic violence and violence against women, we
have introduced femicide as a distinct criminal offence.

. Our goal is the elimination of gender discrimination and creation of
conditions for real equality of women and men in society, at home, as well as
abroad, and in the multilateral system.

. This is why Croatia promotes women, peace and security at the global level
as we know the disproportionate effect of conflict on women, but we have also seen
how women when participating in all peacebuilding and sustaining peace processes
are agents of change and harbingers of peace.
. Croatia also advocates a comprehensive approach to issues affecting persons
with disabilities.

. This includes mainstreaming disability in all fields of human rights.

. With this in mind, in the UN we will be leading an effort by a cross-regional
group of countries to proclaim the International Day of Deafblindness.

. This resolution will hopefully contribute to understanding as well as
encourage and inspire national and legal recognition of deafblindness as a distinct
and unique disability worldwide.

. In the past three years, Croatia has also been honoured to serve as co-chair of
the Group of Friends of Responsibility to Protect in New York.

. We still believe more has to be done in terms of atrocity prevention and the
operationalization of the Responsibility to Protect concept.

° In the humanitarian context, we are facing worse circumstances than ever.

. Croatia presided this year over the Humanitarian Affairs Segment of the
Economic and Social Council, against the challenging backdrop of unresolved
conflicts and eruption and escalation of new ones, climate-related disasters, disease
outbreaks, economic shocks and famine for millions of people.

. Focusing the discussion on the consequences of the erosion of respect for
international humanitarian law, clear and strong calls were heard across the board
for upholding international humanitarian law, ending impunity, bolstering women's
leadership, addressing climate emergency and for ethical and responsible use of
new technologies.

UNITED NATIONS REFORM

Ladies and gentlemen,

. As one of equal successor states of former Yugoslavia, Croatia is among the
founders of the UN. Following the dissolution of former Yugoslavia, in the midst

9
of defending itself from aggression and invasion, 32 years ago Croatia reconfirmed
its commitment to the UN Charter — this time as a free, soverign and independent
Member State of the United Nations. Ours is a journey of liberty and democracy, a
pursuit of peace and prosperity, of vigilant defence of human rights and dignity,
while honouring the values and principles of multilateralism and international
cooperation that the UN embodies.

. Our experience as a small but resilient nation with a deep understanding of
peace, security, and development underscores the importance of reforming and
revitalizing the UN to ensure it remains fit to address the global challenges of today
and tomorrow.

. The Pact for the Future, a pivotal document for strengthening multilateralism
that we adopted earlier this week, elaborates about both General Assembly and
Security Council reform and we believe we should further strengthen, reform and
revitalize these two institutions.

. While the role of the General Assembly has been strengthened recently with
regard to issues which the Security Council failed to address, more should be done
in relation to the maintenance of international peace and security.

. This relates also to the cooperation of the General Assembly with both the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission.

. The UN Secretariat should be made fit for purpose and the selection of the
Secretary-General and all other, especially high-level posts, need to be guided by
the principles of merit, transparency, inclusiveness, gender and geographic rotation.
SOUTHEAST EUROPE

Ladies and Gentlemen,

. Finally, allow me to reflect on South East Europe, a region in our
neighbourhood.

10
. As a country with deep expertise and a nuanced understanding of Southeast
Europe, Croatia stands as a model of successful integration into both the European
Union and NATO.

. This unique position not only gives Croatia a special status within the region
but also grants it significant authority in advocating for peace, stability, and the
European aspirations of its neighbours.

. Croatia consistently encourages our Western Balkan partners to invest even
more efforts in fulfilling the established criteria.

. Regional cooperation and good-neighbourly relations, along with solving
outstanding issues and disputes remain an essential, indispensable part of the
process.

. The merit-based approach and rewarding individual achievements in
fulfilling the standards will accelerate accession to the European family.

° In this regard, those who cooperate in good faith, (align with the EU’s
Common Foreign and Security Policy) and conduct genuine reforms should move
ahead on their EU accession paths.

. Of particular importance for Croatia is the stability of neighbouring Bosnia
and Herzegovina, with which we share more than a thousand kilometres long
border.

. In order to achieve security and stability in the country, the constitutional full
equality of the three constituent peoples — Croats, Bosniaks and Serbs — must be
ensured and the Dayton-Paris Accords, the peace treaties that ended the war and
confirmed the multinational, multi-confessional and multicultural Bosnia and
Herzegovina, must be upheld.

11
CONCLUSION
Ladies and gentlemen,

° In conclusion, Croatia’s story is one of transformation—from a nation
rebuilding after war to a committed partner within the global community.

. Our journey reflects the power of collaboration, vision, and perseverance.

. As we look ahead, Croatia is ready to continue contributing to a world where
peace, justice, human rights and sustainable development are attainable for all.

° Together, through multilateralism, we can overcome today’s challenges and
build a future where every country, every citizen, can thrive.

. The path may be long and difficult, but by standing united, we can make it a
reality.

. Let us move forward with renewed purpose, ensuring that the foundations we
build today will support a prosperous and peaceful tomorrow.

Thank you.

12
