9/24/24, 4:56 PM

row

*

THe ROYAL HASHEMITE COouRT

Remarks by His Majesty King Abdullah II at the 79th Session of the United
Nations General Assembly

24 September 2024

79 AN Ui gs Banta) oS Lalall Areal) Gleleiay datas! 4

In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful
Mr President,

Mr Secretary General,

Your Excellencies:

Over the past quarter-century, I have stood at this podium amidst
regional conflicts, global upheavals, and humanitarian crises that
have profoundly tested our global community.

It often feels that there was not a moment when our world was not
in turmoil. And yet, I cannot recall a time of greater peril than this.

Our United Nations is facing a crisis that strikes at its very
legitimacy and threatens a collapse of global trust and moral
authority.

The UN is under attack—literally and figuratively.

For nearly a year, the sky-blue flag flying over UN shelters and
schools in Gaza has been powerless to protect innocent civilians
from Israeli military bombardment.

UN aid trucks sit motionless just miles away from starving
Palestinians. Humanitarian workers who proudly wear the emblem

https://rhc.jo/en/media/media-post/remarks-his-majesty-king-abdullah-ii-7 9th-session-united-nations-general-assembly

Remarks by His Majesty King Abdullah II at the 79th Session of the United Nations General Assembly | Royal Hashemite Court

1/5
9/24/24, 4:56 PM

Remarks by His Majesty King Abdullah II at the 79th Session of the United Nations General Assembly | Royal Hashemite Court

of this institution are disparaged and targeted. And the rulings of
the UN’s International Court of Justice are defied, its opinions
disregarded.

So it’s no surprise that both inside and outside this Hall, trust in
UN’s cornerstone principles and ideals is crumbling.

The harsh reality many see is that some nations are above
international law, that global justice does bend to the will of power,
and that human rights are selective; a privilege to be granted or
denied at will.

We cannot stand for that, and we must recognise that undermining
our international institutions and global frameworks is one of the
gravest threats to our global security today.

Ask yourselves, if we are not nations united in the conviction that all
people are equal in rights, dignity, and worth, and that all countries
are equal in the eyes of the law, what kind of world does that leave
us with?

Your Excellencies,

The attacks of October 7 on Israeli civilians last year were
condemned by countries all over the world, including Jordan, but
the unprecedented scale of terror unleashed on Gaza since that day
is beyond any justification.

The Israeli government’s assault has resulted in one of the fastest
death rates in recent conflicts, one of the fastest rates of starvation
caused by war, the largest cohort of child amputees, and
unprecedented levels of destruction.

This Israeli government has killed more children, more journalists,
more aid workers, and more medical personnel than any other war
in recent memory.

And let us not forget the attacks on the West Bank. There, since
October 7, the Israeli government has killed more than 700
Palestinians, among them, 160 children. Palestinians held in Israeli
detention centres exceed 10,700, including 400 women and 730
children —730 children. Over 4,000 Palestinians have been forced
from their homes and lands. Armed settler violence has surged. And
entire villages have been displaced.

And in Jerusalem, flagrant violations of the historical and legal
status quo at Muslim and Christian Holy Sites continue unabated,
under the protection and encouragement of members of the Israeli
government.

To be clear, this is in the West Bank, not Gaza.

https://rhc.jo/en/media/media-post/remarks-his-majesty-king-abdullah-ii-7 9th-session-united-nations-general-assembly

2/5
Remarks by His Majesty King Abdullah II at the 79th Session of the United Nations General Assembly | Royal Hashemite Court

Almost 42,000 Palestinians have been killed since October 7.

So is it any wonder that many are questioning, how can this war not
be perceived as deliberately targeting the Palestinians?

The level of civilian suffering cannot be written off as unavoidable
collateral.

I grew up a soldier, in a region that is all too familiar with conflict.
But there is nothing familiar about this war and the violence
unleashed since October 7.

In the absence of global accountability, repeated horrors are
normalised, threatening to create a future where anything is
permitted anywhere in the world. Is that what we want?

Now is the time to ensure the protection of the Palestinian people. It
is the moral duty of this international community to establish a
protection mechanism for them across the occupied territories. This
will guarantee the safety of Palestinians and Israelis from
extremists who are taking our region to the brink of an all-out war.

That includes those who continue to propagate the idea of Jordan as
an alternative homeland. So let me be very, very clear—that will
never happen. We will never accept the forced displacement of
Palestinians, which is a war crime.

No country in the region benefits from escalation. We have seen that
clearly in the dangerous developments in Lebanon over the past few
days. This has to stop.

For years, the Arab world has extended a hand to Israel through the
Arab Peace Initiative, offering full recognition and normalisation in
exchange for peace. But consecutive Israeli governments,
emboldened by years of impunity, have rejected peace and chosen
confrontation instead.

Impunity gathers force. Left unchecked, it gains momentum.

Palestinians have borne more than 57 years of occupation and
oppression. During this time, the Israeli government has been
allowed to cross one red line after another.

But now, Israel’s decades-long impunity is becoming its own worst
enemy.

And the consequences are everywhere.

The Israeli government has been accused of genocide at the ICJ.
Expressions of outrage at its conduct are echoing around the world.
Cities everywhere have seen mass protests, and calls for sanctions
are growing louder.

https://rhc.jo/en/media/media-post/remarks-his-majesty-king-abdullah-ii-7 9th-session-united-nations-general-assembly 3/5
9/24/24, 4:56 PM

International frustration with Israel has long been mounting, but it
has never been more exposed.

For decades, Israel has projected itself as a thriving Western-styled
democracy in the Middle East.

But the brutality of the war on Gaza has forced the world to look
closer.

Now, many see Israel through the eyes of its victims. And the
contradiction, the paradox, is too jarring.

The modern, advanced Israel admired from afar, and the Israel that
Palestinians have experienced firsthand simply cannot co-exist.
Israel will eventually be entirely one or the other.

That is the choice its leaders and its people will have to make. To live
by the democratic values of freedom, justice, and equality for all, or
to risk further isolation and rejection.

Over and over, we have watched Israel try to achieve security
through military means. Each escalation is followed by a pause,
until the next, deadlier one.

And for years, the global community has taken the path of least
resistance—accepting the status quo of the ongoing military
occupation of Palestinians, all the while paying lip service to the
two-state solution.

But it has never been more evident that the current status quo is
untenable. And, as the International Court of Justice’s advisory
opinion underscored two months ago, it is unequivocally illegal.

The Court’s opinion bears a moral imperative to us all. The
obligation it carries is one that our nations cannot afford to ignore
—for the sake of our world, as well as the future for Palestinians and
Israelis alike.

Because both peoples deserve to live their lives in dignity, free of
violence and fear.

And the only way to achieve that is a just peace, one grounded in
international law, justice, equal rights, and mutual recognition.

That is something we, as nations and people everywhere, can and
must unite around.

Your Excellencies,

The world is watching, and history will judge us by the courage we
show.

https://rhc.jo/en/media/media-post/remarks-his-majesty-king-abdullah-ii-7 9th-session-united-nations-general-assembly

Remarks by His Majesty King Abdullah II at the 79th Session of the United Nations General Assembly | Royal Hashemite Court

AIS
9/24/24, 4:56 PM

Remarks by His Majesty King Abdullah II at the 79th Session of the United Nations General Assembly | Royal Hashemite Court

And it’s not just the future that will hold us accountable, so will the
people of the here and now.

They will judge whether we, as the United Nations, will surrender to
inaction, or will fight to uphold the principles that anchor this
institution and our world.

Right now, they are asking whether we will stand by as parents
watch their children waste away, as doctors watch their patients die
for lack of basic medical supplies, and as more innocent lives are
lost, because the world failed to act.

This war must end. Hostages and detainees must return home. But
every day we wait is one day too long for far too many.

So I call on all countries to join Jordan in enforcing an international
Gaza Humanitarian Gateway—a massive relief effort to deliver food,
clean water, medicine, and other vital supplies to those in desperate
need. Because humanitarian aid should never be a tool of war.

Whatever our politics, one truth is undeniable—no people should
have to endure such unprecedented suffering, abandoned and alone.
We cannot surrender the future to those who thrive on division and
conflict.

I urge all nations of conscience to unite with Jordan in the critical
weeks ahead on this mission.

Almost a year into this war, our world has failed politically, but our
humanity must not fail the people of Gaza any longer.

Echoing the words of my father from 64 years ago, at the 15th
session of the General Assembly, I pray that this community of
nations may have the courage to decide wisely and fearlessly, and
will act with the urgent resolve that this crisis and our conscience
demand.

My father was a man who fought for peace to the very end. And, like
him, I refuse to leave my children, or your children, a future we have

given up on.

Thank you.

https://rhc.jo/en/media/media-post/remarks-his-majesty-king-abdullah-ii-7 9th-session-united-nations-general-assembly

5/5
