KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

327 East 58" Street, New York, NY 10022
TEL: (212) 336-0777 FAX: (212) 759-7672

Statement by

H.E. Chenda Sophea Sok

Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International

Cooperation of the Kingdom of Cambodia

At the General Debate of the 79 session

of the United Nations

28 September 2024

United Nations Headquarters, New York
Excellency Philémon Yang, President of the General Assembly,
Excellency Anténio Guterres, UN Secretary-General,
Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,

1. First, I would like to extend my heartfelt congratulations to His Excellency Philémon
Yang, on his election as President of the 79th United Nations General Assembly. Your
leadership is crucial in these challenging times, and my delegation wishes to assure
you of Cambodia's full support. I also sincerely thank His Excellency Dennis Francis
for his exceptional stewardship during the 78th UNGA. His dedication and achievements
have set a remarkable example for all of us.

2. Mr. President, your chosen theme, "Leaving No One Behind: Acting Together for the
Advancement of Peace, Sustainable Development, and Human Dignity for Present
and Future Generations," mirrors the prevailing aspirations of the international
community despite intractable security threats and challenges, as well as uncertainty
and continuously evolving geopolitical landscape.

3. The current picture of the world is grim. Violent conflicts in Ukraine, Gaza, Sudan,
Myanmar and many other parts of the world rage on despite efforts to de-escalate
them. Worse, with intensifying geopolitical tensions, any misstep in various flashpoints
may trigger a regional or even global war, potentially involving nuclear weapons.

4, Military spending has surged across the world, draining resources that could be used
to address multiplying nontraditional threats—threats that no single country can
effectively tackle alone, such as climate change, pandemics, food insecurity,
technological disruptions, transnational crime and backsliding on SDGs.

Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,

5. Cambodia cannot emphasize enough the urgency for all of us to act together to
confront these daunting challenges. It is critical that the principles of the UN Charter
and international law remain the backbone of the world order and global cooperation.
The use of diplomacy and mediation must be prioritized to resolve conflicts and
prevent their escalation. Cambodia believes that sustainable peace can be achieved
only through meaningful dialogue based on mutual respect, genuine goodwill,
tolerance and a commitment to peaceful coexistence.

6. Based on these core principles, Cambodia sees great merit in the New Agenda for
Peace presented by the UN Secretary-General, and it supports the actions laid out in
the Pact for the Future for promoting international peace and security.

Page 1|5
7. Also based on these principles, Cambodia hopes for a prompt end to the war between
Russia and Ukraine, through diplomacy and dialogue based on equal respect. We
commend all efforts to de-escalate the fighting and all initiatives that seek to end the war
through peaceful means and that engage all sides to work toward a lasting peace.

8. On the Palestine-Israel conflict: Cambodia remains committed to its long-held
support for a two-state solution, in accordance with the relevant UN resolutions. We
believe this plan is the only way Palestinians and Israelis can heal their prolonged
antagonism and live side-by-side peacefully. Put differently: Cambodia supports both
the establishment of the State of Palestine and Palestine’s bid to become a full member
of the United Nations. At the same time, Cambodia condemns all acts of terrorism and
calls for a dialogue to stop the ongoing war and the ever-worsening humanitarian crisis
in Gaza.

9. Weare deeply concerned over the prospect of an all-out region-wide war in the Middle
East, as Israel is intensifying attacks on targets in Lebanon. The current rapid escalation
of war in this region must stop; members of the international community must insist
on all sides to work proactively to seek ways to defuse the situation, now.

10. The crisis in Myanmar remains a serious concern to us. Cambodia, along with other
ASEAN Member States, is committed to ASEAN’s Five-Point Consensus as the basis
for a peaceful and inclusive solution. We stress the importance of fostering an
environment conducive to dialogue and to ceasefire negotiations. We also emphasize
the need for humanitarian relief and fora Myanmar-owned and Myanmar-led political
process aimed at lasting peace and reconciliation. ASEAN, on the strength of its
diversity, should continue to lead the effort to help Myanmar restore normalcy, and
we commend its progress under Laos’s chairmanship. Cambodia welcomes the
appointment of Her Excellency Julie Bishop as Special Envoy of the UN Secretary-
General on Myanmar and looks forward to her working closely with the ASEAN
Chair's own Special Envoy on Myanmar.

11. A final point: Cambodia opposes Unilateral Coercive Measures. They have a
detrimental impact on ordinary citizens in targeted nations. Sanctions and economic
blockades disproportionately harm the most vulnerable and impede achievement of
the Sustainable Development Goals.

Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,

12. Let me talk now about Leaving No One Behind. Given Cambodia’s own dark past,
we believe that peace is the key prerequisite for development, especially development
that is sustainable and inclusive. Cambodia sees the attainment of sustainable

Page 2|5
development and human dignity for every individual as an absolute necessity.
Cambodia's current long-term development strategy, called the Pentagonal Strategy,
aims to build Cambodia into a vibrant and just society that thrives on lasting peace,
political stability, good governance and respect for the rule of law.

13. With economic growth projected to reach 6 percent in 2024, Cambodia is on track to
further reduce poverty to below 10 percent by 2028. It is also on track to gain upper-
middle-income status by 2030 and high-income status by 2050.

14. How do we plan to get there?

15. First, Cambodia will give top priority to building its human capital to meet the
demands of the digital age. We will invest more on enhancing (1) quality education,
science and technology, (2) training in technical skills, (3) health and well-being, and
(4) food security and equal social protection, with special attention to women, girls and
the marginalized.

16. Second, we will deepen economic diversification by developing key sectors, such as
transportation and energy, and we will promote new drivers for economic growth and
job creation. The construction of the Funan Techo Canal inaugurated last month will
connect our capital, Phnom Penh, to the Gulf of Thailand. It will be a game-changer
for sustainable growth in Cambodia and for improving the livelihood of our people.

17. Third, to enhance efficiency, inclusion and access to public services, Cambodia will
accelerate the development of e-government, and of a digital economy and society. I
am happy to note our significant advancement in financial inclusion, with the
introduction of an interoperable digital payment system by the central bank using
Blockchain technology called Bakong.

18. Fourth, we take a whole-of-society approach to development that seeks to enhance
resilience, sustainability and inclusion by promoting gender equality, a green and
circular economy, and environmental protection.

19. After years on the list of Least Developed Countries, Cambodia looks forward to its
expected graduation from LDC status by 2029. Reaching this milestone will reflect our
impressive progress on our journey of revival and development.

Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,

20. Cambodia values multilateralism, the rules-based international order, the principles
enshrined in the UN Charter and international law. These are indispensable for
consensus-building and mobilizing concerted actions. And we worry that confidence

Page 3|5
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

in the fairness and effectiveness of multilateralism is eroding. Conflicts are
multiplying. Geopolitical competition is intensifying. Adherence to international
regimes is declining on many fronts—arms control, trade, the environment, human
rights.

It is time that Member States reaffirm their commitment to the global system and
rebuild trust in it. The United Nations, with its unparalleled convening power, has
long been the driving force in addressing global challenges and promoting cooperation
among states. But unprecedented challenges today are testing the limits of this
esteemed body. We urgently need to revitalize the UN and make it more robust and
more proactive.

Cambodia fully supports the Secretary-General's reform agenda, including the
Intergovernmental Negotiations on Security Council reform. The UNSC needs to be
tailored to the 21st century; and to be effective for today’s tasks, its composition must
be more fairly representative. As the Secretary-General has rightly stated, "We can't
create a future fit for our grandchildren with systems built for our grandparents."

Cambodia also fully supports the Secretary-General's call for bold climate actions. To
achieve net-zero emissions by 2050, as it has pledged it would do, Cambodia has
launched many measures, including raising the current 62% renewable energy share
to at least 70% by 2030, by promoting reforestation and by providing incentives to
green-investment projects. Cambodia actively participates in global climate
negotiations, and it looks forward to the upcoming COP 29 in Baku, Azerbaijan.

Cambodia also fully supports the work of the High-Level Political Forum on SDGs
held in July under ECOSOC. We welcome the adoption of the Ministerial Declaration
on SDGs. We reaffirm our commitment to the 2030 Agenda. We endorse efforts to
bridge the SDG financing gap, reform the global financial system, and strengthen
multilevel governance.

As all of us together look to the future, it should seem evident that no nation can
achieve these ambitious goals alone. Global challenges demand global solutions.
Cambodia is committed to strengthening international cooperation, sharing
knowledge and best practices, and working collaboratively with our global partners.
By acting together, all of us here can create a world where peace, sustainable
development, and human dignity are a reality for all our peoples.

Cambodia commends the success of the Summit of the Future and affirms our
steadfast commitment to the letter and the spirit of the Pact for the Future — to

Page 4|5
international peace and security, to turbocharging SDGs, to modernizing multilateral
institutions.

Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,

27.

28.

29.

Cambodia is proud to play a significant role in global peacekeeping. Since 2006, we
have sent over 9,000 of our people to serve in 11 UN missions, including over 800
women. We are honored to present our candidacy for membership in the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission for 2025-26. We seek
your support for our bid. Cambodia supports relevant adjustments and reforms to
increase the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and promote the agenda of
Women, Peace and Security and Youth, Peace and Security.

Cambodia is also honored to be hosting the Fifth Review Conference of the Mine Ban
Convention, also known as the Ottawa Convention, in November in Siem Reap. This
landmark event will serve as a platform for renewed global solidarity in the pursuit of
a world free from the scourge of anti-personnel mines. We extend a warm invitation
to all Member States to join us for this important gathering.

In conclusion, Cambodia reaffirms its steadfast commitment to working hand-in-hand
with the UN and all Member States to advance the noble goals of peace, sustainable
development, and human dignity. Cambodia stands ready to contribute our unique
experience, resources, and unwavering determination to this endeavor. For Cambodia,
sustainable and inclusive development means “no one and no place is left behind”.

Thank you

Page 5|5
