Remarks by H.E. Cho Tae-yul
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea
General Debate
79 Session of the UN General Assembly
New York, September 27, 2024

(Check against delivery)

Mr. President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Distinguished Delegates,

I extend my congratulations to His Excellency Philemon Yang
on assuming the Presidency of the 79 session of the General
Assembly.

Let me also pay tribute to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for his dedication to global peace and prosperity.

(State of the world in 2024)

The year 2024 has sadly earned the distinction of being the
most conflict-ridden year since World War II.
Across the globe, from Ukraine to the Middle East, conflict
and division have torn at the fabric of human dignity.

Two billion people, or roughly | in 4, reside in conflict zones;
310 million people require humanitarian assistance worldwide,
and more than 120 million, or 1 in 70, are refugees.

Meanwhile, records suggest that we are brushing dangerously
close to the critical threshold of 1.5 Celsius degrees.

Most worrying of all, the international community seems to be
losing the sense of what these numbers really stand for: real
lives disrupted, families displaced, futures lost, and a
planetary crisis looming.

As the war of aggression against Ukraine drags on to its third
year, as seemingly intractable challenges mount with no end
in sight, cynicism and powerlessness are hardening in some
quarters.

There is a growing belief that multilateralism is ineffective
and that the United Nations is no longer relevant.
(Republic of Korea: Proof that UN in Action Works)
But I stand before you today to affirm that this is not true.

My nation’s very existence as a free, democratic, and
prosperous country is the proof that the United Nations in
action works.

It was the first-ever UN-led coalition that defended the
freedom and democracy in the Republic of Korea ravaged by
war in early 1950s.

Our journey from devastation to democracy and prosperity
was made possible by the continued support of the
international community, particularly through UN agencies
and programs.

The story of the Republic of Korea provides the antidote
against paralyzing defeatism. It is a story of what we can
achieve when good men and women choose to act together. A
concrete evidence that multilateral system can make a real
difference.

If global challenges are mounting, then we must double down
on multilateralism. We need more of UN in action, not less.
(Summit of the Future)

This is why I applaud the timely and proactive initiative of
Secretary General Antonio Guterres to convene the
Summit of the Future this year.

As we prepare to mark the 80" session of the UN General
Assembly next year, we must ask ourselves: what will be the
UN’s role in the decades to come? Where do we see ourselves
in the 90" and the 100" session of the UN General Assembly?

The Pact for the Future is the culmination of all our soul-
searching at the Summit of the Future. It galvanizes our
resolve to act not just for the present but for the future
generations as well.

(Republic of Korea in Action: Triple Roles in the UN)

Mr. President,

Now, the onus is on each and every one of the UN Members
to fulfill the commitments under the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement.

Earlier I mentioned that ‘UN in action’ works. But we must

not forget, ‘UN in action’ actually means ‘UN Members in
action.’
Under the foreign policy vision of President Yoon Suk Yeol,
the Republic of Korea seeks to be a Global Pivotal State,
recognizing both its indebtedness to the multilateral systems
and its growing ability to be their champion.

The Republic of Korea is committed to do its part as a UN
Member by serving three functions: a facilitator, a supporter
and an initiator.

First, in the global efforts to build sustainable peace, the
Republic of Korea will act as a facilitator.

Peace is not merely the absence of conflict; it is the
sustainable presence of security and opportunity. The
Republic of Korea understands this deeply, having endured
the trials of war and division.

Today, the Republic of Korea is one of the core contributors
to UN peacekeeping and peace-building efforts around the
world. Its troops and experts serve in some of the world’s
most volatile regions, providing not just security but hope.

To ensure that peace is durable, however, it is important to go
beyond the individual efforts of contributing countries.
The Republic of Korea advocates strengthening the UN’s
peacebuilding architecture, with the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) at its core, fulfilling its unique mandate to
bridge all three pillars of the UN to bring greater coherence
and a more integrated approach.

We will actively participate in the peacebuilding architecture
review next year, with a focus on how to strengthen the
humanitarian, development and peace (HDP) nexus.

We will also align our humanitarian aid and development
cooperation programs with the United Nations’ activities to
promote peace and security around the world, and collaborate
with the UN to identify multifaceted challenges and address
their root causes in a coherent and holistic manner.

At the heart of our mission as a facilitator is our role as an
elected member of the Security Council for the 2024-25 term.

Our focus is on peacekeeping and peacebuilding, advancing
the Women, Peace, and Security (WPS) agenda, and
addressing the complex relationship between climate and
security.

However, we must also face the dysfunctions that have
hampered the Council’s effectiveness.
It is increasingly difficult to justify the current structure when
a permanent member continues its war of aggression on its
neighbor, challenging the fundamental tenets of the UN
Charter it is tasked with upholding. The misuse of its right to
veto is putting deadlocks on important and urgent work.

As we seek to find practical solutions by actively building
common ground amongst the diverging views of the Council
members, we will also work with all UN Member states to
achieve a comprehensive Security Council reform in the
Intergovernmental Negotiations.

Expanding elected membership under equitable geographical
distribution and through regular elections will contribute to a
more democratic, effective, transparent, representative and
accountable Council. The compromise proposal of longer-
term re-electable seats deserves due attention in this regard.

The Republic of Korea will also actively address the surging
demand for humanitarian aid in the midst of ongoing conflicts.

This year, the Republic of Korea has committed $200 million
in humanitarian aid to Ukraine. And we also plan to provide
$100 million to tackle humanitarian crises by this year’s end,
including $30 million for civilians affected by the ongoing
Israel-Hamas conflict.
Sadly, conflict in the Middle East is now being further
escalated, especially in the Israel-Lebanon border. The
Republic of Korea joins the U.S., France and many others in
urging the parties to pause their fighting and instead give
diplomacy a chance to succeed.

Second, the Republic of Korea will play a role as a
supporter for the Global South in their efforts to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and take
climate actions.

As the first country to transition from an aid recipient to a
donor nation, we firmly believe that we can and should be the
tide that lifts other boats.

This philosophy underpins our approach to official
development assistance (ODA) which has grown by 30% this
year from last year, and quadrupled since 2010.

With only six years left to meet the SDGs and only 17% of
these goals on track, we also wish to be smart about how our
ODA is put to use, however fast-growing it is.

Our initiative to serve as a Green Ladder through our Green
ODA demonstrates the commitment to tackle the nexus of
climate change and the SDGs.
Recently, the Republic of Korea has committed an additional
$300 million to the Green Climate Fund, $7 million to the
Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage and has plans to
continue expanding its Green ODA.

But financial support is only part of the equation.

We are buttressing our funding with intangible support by
sharing our unique developmental know-how and by building
wider and more sustained partnerships.

The inaugural ‘Korea-Pacific Islands Summit’ held last year
as well as the first-ever ‘Korea-Africa Summit’ held in June
this year were landmark events which highlighted our
commitment to deepening mutually enriching partnerships
with these regions.

At the June Korea-Africa Summit, we pledged to increase our
ODA to Africa up to $10 billion by 2030 and to
collaboratively address global challenges such as climate
change, food insecurity, and supply chain disruptions.

We put a particular focus on empowering the youths of Africa,
the youngest continent in the world, to drive sustainable
development through initiatives like Tech4A frica.
Next year, we plan to organize the inaugural Korea-Central
Asia Summit where sustainable development will again take
center stage.

All of this would only be a half-measure without Korea’s own
green transition. We will remain fully committed to Carbon-
Free Energy (CFE) Initiative.

Third, the Republic of Korea will act as an initiator in the
global efforts to install new norms and governance for
human dignity and well-being.

The exponential growth of technology, particularly in the field
of artificial intelligence (AJ), has not only opened new
frontiers but also poses potential risks to human rights and
dignity. Meeting such a new challenge requires new norms
and governance fit for our time.

To that end, my President, standing in this very hall last year,
pledged to lead the global discussions on AI governance, and
we have since spearheaded efforts to establish frameworks
that ensure AI is developed and used in service of humanity.

The Seoul Declaration for Safe, Innovative and Inclusive AI,
adopted during the AI Seoul Summit in May, marked a
significant milestone in building the norms for civilian AI.
The adoption of Blueprint for Action during the 2" Summit
on Responsible AI in the Military Domain earlier this month
in Seoul further laid the groundwork for norms for military
use of AI.

We are also dedicated to addressing cyber threats and
promoting an open, free, and safe cyberspace that respects
human rights.

Leveraging its expertise in cybersecurity, the Republic of
Korea has actively participated in global efforts to establish
comprehensive norms, including the UN Convention against
Cybercrime.

Our work extends to the UN Security Council where as an
elected member, the Republic of Korea is helping to lay a
solid foundation for the Council’s effective and agile response
to cybersecurity issues.

Another area of concern is plastic pollution, a global crisis
that threatens both ecosystems and human health.

The Republic of Korea will host the 5" and the last session of
the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee on Plastic
Pollution in Busan in November this year where we hope to
work with the UN members to reach a binding agreement to
end this pollution.
(August 15th Unification Doctrine)
Mr. President,

The heartbreaking tragedy is that just miles from Seoul,
we find cynicism at its bleakest.

North Korea continues to pose threats to peace and security on
the Korean peninsula and beyond with its ongoing
development of nuclear and missile capabilities as shown by
their recent disclosure of uranium enrichment facility as well
as provocations that have stooped down to despicable levels
such as sending trash balloons into the South.

Moreover, North Korea has been engaged in military
cooperation with Russia providing it with missiles and
millions of ammunitions. It is indeed deplorable that Russia, a
permanent Security Council member and one of the founding
states for the non-proliferation regime, is engaging in illegal
arms trade with North Korea and, in April of this year, vetoed
the extension of the mandate of the ‘Panel of Experts’ on
sanctions against North Korea which had been functioning
effectively for the past 15 years.

The heart of the matter is that North Korea’s nuclear and
missile programs and egregious human rights abuses are two
sides of the same coin.
North Korea is only able to develop these weapons of mass
destruction with impunity by repressing the human rights of
its people and diverting scarce resources from its starving
populace.

What Pyongyang offers is not a vision but a cold and self-
serving calculus, a calculus that only sees twin deficits
persisting indefinitely: a deficit of peace on the peninsula and
a deficit of freedom in North Korea.

Mr. President,

The ‘August 15 Unification Doctrine,’ unveiled by
President Yoon Suk Yeol last month, presents a vision of a
“unified Korean Peninsula that is free, peaceful, and
prosperous.”

Recognizing that achieving sustainable peace is an unfinished
task on the peninsula, we firmly believe that the road to peace
runs through the expansion of freedom and through the
unification of Korean Peninsula. And this peace will
contribute to global peace and security.

Under this vision, freedom which has underpinned the
Republic of Korea’s independence, growth, and prosperity
will at last be fully unlocked in the North, restoring the human
rights of each and every Korean.

13
Achieving this vision requires the international community to
advocate the freedom and human rights of North Koreans who
have no voice.

The Republic of Korea is committed to working together with
the international community to steer North Korea towards
making the right decisions.

Mr. President,

Nearly 75 years ago, founders of the United Nations stood
together, bound by faith in multilateralism to defend freedom
and sovereignty and uphold the UN Charter.

As we approach the 80" session of the General Assembly next
year, we must recommit ourselves to the principles that
brought us together.

Multilateralism is not an outdated concept — it is the only path
forward.

To stand idle in the face of today’s challenges would be to
abandon both the vulnerable of today and the generations of
tomorrow. Thank you. /END/
