CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

‘igs

STATEMENT

HIS EXCELLENCY MR PRITHVIRAJSING ROOPUN,
G.C.S.K.,
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS

KREKEKRKEEKE

79TH SESSION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

GENERAL DEBATE
26 SEPTEMBER 2024

“UNITY AND DIVERSITY FOR ADVANCING PEACE,
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND HUMAN DIGNITY,
EVERYWHERE AND FOR ALL”

Your Excellency, Mr. Philemon Yang, President

of the General Assembly,

Your Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary

General of the United Nations,

Excellencies

Distinguished Delegates,

Good afternoon.

Mr. President - | also warmly congratulate you.

Mauritius is proud to see a son of Africa assume the

high office as President of the 79th Session of the

General Assembly.

I assure you of the full support of Mauritius.

We remain committed to the universal values and

noble aspirations of the United Nations.
Our appreciation also goes to His Excellency Dennis
Francis, who, throughout the 78th _ session,
championed solidarity and unity during challenging

times.

Secretary General, Antonio Guterres also deserves
our special recognition for his inspiring and
commendable initiatives in furthering the objectives

of our organisation.

Mr. President,

The theme being addressed in this august Assembly
is in consonance and resonates deeply with the very

essence of our organisation.

The UN emerged out of the ashes of war and untold

sufferings.

We have a moral obligation to ensure that the
ultimate sacrifice of millions of women and men was

not in vain.
Our Organisation has since, embodied the universal
values of peace, justice, equity, respect for the rule

of law and human dignity.

It is appalling that we are lately witnessing an

erosion of these same values.

Unfortunately, might is taking over and impunity

still prevails.

The dignity of the weakest is being shamelessly

flouted, on a scale never seen before.

Behind protracted conflicts around the world, lies

inestimable human cost.

Mr President

The devastation and sufferings in Gaza are heart

wrenching.

Thousands of innocent lives have been lost.
We urge the international community to find a
solution for a de-escalation in the region, for a just

and lasting peace.

And, we are convinced that the two-State Solution,
based on relevant UN resolutions and international

law, will uphold human dignity and equality for all.

We welcome the advisory opinion on the legal
consequences arising from the policies and
practices of Israel in the Occupied Palestinian

Territory, including East Jerusalem.

There is an urgent need for a renewed commitment
to diplomacy and constructive dialogue.
As, in many parts of the world, conflicts, instability

and challenges to security are still unabated.

Mr. President

The world has witnessed an unprecedented

technological revolution in a short span of time.
For humanity to benefit from its transformative
power, AI governance should be anchored in

international law.

Current unsustainable consumption and
production trends are exacerbating injustices and
inequalities.

We are at a watershed moment.

Mauritius welcomes the adoption of the Pact for the
Future, which is a renewed testimony to our

collective resolve for the betterment of our world.

We also need to ensure that the overall architecture

of our global institutions reflects today’s realities.

Mauritius believes that inclusivity is a necessity,

and not a choice.

Small States and large alike deserve a voice.
Africa and SIDS have their rightful place in a

reformed Security Council.

Multilateral and International Financial
Institutions should be more representative and

responsive to the needs of all countries.

This is the only way to pave for a more equitable and

resilient world, where human dignity is upheld.
Mr. President,

Mauritius believes that human dignity is universal,
inalienable and unconditional, this conviction has

always guided our actions.

Our multicultural society thrives on fairness, equity

and human dignity.

Through unity in diversity, we have strengthened

our unique and tolerant society.
We have spared no effort in advancing the

economic, social, and cultural rights of our citizens.

Our commitment to free and fair elections, good
governance, and putting people at the centre of

development remains resolute.

We are investing heavily in free healthcare,
infrastructural development, and free education

from pre-primary to tertiary level.

We are promoting decent work for all.

The empowerment of women and youth remains at

the heart of the Government actions.

These inclusive approaches and supportive policies
have contributed to the strengthening of our social

fabric.

Mr. President, no country alone can overcome

multiple crises.
The climate emergency is one of the most pressing

global threats of our time.

Green House Gas emissions from human activities
have irrefutably contributed to global warming, sea

level rise and coastal erosion.

It is most unfortunate that SIDS, like Mauritius,
which have contributed the least to global

emissions, are being the most affected.

A multilateral approach to confront these threats is

an absolute necessity.

We must achieve the highest possible ambition
while ensuring equity, common and differentiated

responsibilities.

Our actions need to be guided by the latest scientific
insights and informed by the outcomes of the Global
Stocktake agreed upon at COP 28, including its
roadmap for keeping 1.5°C within reach.

This target is a lifeline for all of us, especially SIDS.

9
Therefore, an agreement on a fair and ambitious
New Collective Quantified Goal on climate should be

reached.

As temperatures rise, the very foundation of life for

Oceanic States are endangered.

We welcome the recent advisory opinion of the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea on

Climate Change.

It stands as a juridical lighthouse, compelling all
States to chart a new course, guided by science and

the moral imperative of inter-generational equity.
In the fight against climate change, our resolve
should be translated into concrete and time bound

actions.

One which is commensurate with the urgency and

scale of the climate crisis.

10
Mr President,

Mauritius has_ ratified the BBNJ_ Treaty
underscoring our commitment to protecting our
ocean resources and ensuring sustainable marine

governance.
We are fully committed to the implementation of the
Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS adopted

earlier this year.

The openness of SIDS economies makes us more

vulnerable to external shocks.

SIDS should be able to access global value chains

for green jobs.
We welcome innovative approaches and the use of

the MVI for enhancing the effectiveness of access to

concessional finance.

Mr President

11
Mauritius has been and remains fully committed to

the advancement of our African continent.

Africa is a land of untapped potential.

However, our Continent is faced with several
challenges preventing it from realising its full

potential.

Our Agenda 2063, including the African
Continental Free Trade Area (AfCfTA), has the
ability to propel Africa.

Our Continent also resonates with cultural

richness, and stands united in purpose.

Africa, with its youth dividend, stands ready to
contribute to global solutions in shaping a more
equitable and sustainable world, for a_ better

tomorrow.

We call upon the international community to

participate in Africa's Transformative Journey.

12
Mr. President,

Mauritius and the United Kingdom are still
pursuing negotiations on the exercise of sovereignty
over the Chagos Archipelago, following the Advisory
Opinion of the International Court of Justice of 25
February 2019. Several rounds of talks have taken
place so far and Mauritius continues to be engaged

in these talks in good faith.

We urge the United Kingdom to _ conclude
expeditiously an agreement that would allow for the
completion of the decolonization of Mauritius and
the implementation of a resettlement programme
for the former inhabitants of the Chagos
Archipelago in accordance with Mauritian laws.
Such an agreement would also protect and preserve

vital security interests on Diego Garcia.

We also appeal to France to resolve the dispute over
Tromelin, which forms an integral part of the

13
territory of Mauritius, in the spirit of friendship that
characterises the relations between our two

countries.

Before concluding, I wish to emphasise that the
United Nations remains the ideal platform in
bringing us together to address global challenges for

a peaceful and more equitable world.

We need to recognise the contribution of the UN, its

agencies and dedicated personnel.

Mr President,
We are convinced that the Pact for the Future will
serve as the guiding star leading us to an improved

world for tomorrow’s generations.

I am confident that together we can forge a better,

brighter and more equitable world.

14
One where no one is left behind.

Where human dignity and human rights prevail.

Where Collective Good for mankind remains at the

core, for lasting peace and prosperity.

I thank you.

15
