Address
by
His Excellency Dr Mohamed Muizzu,
President of the Republic of Maldives
at UNGA79 General Debate
24 September 2024

Mr President,
Mr Secretary General,
Assalamu alaikum, and good afternoon.

Mr President: congratulations on the assumption of your
Presidency of the General Assembly.

Our appreciation also, to your predecessor, for his strong
leadership.

We extend our gratitude to the Secretary-General for his tireless
efforts in steering the Secretariat.

We gather here today at a delicate moment in world history.
Let’s not mince our words today. Humanity is in deep trouble
facing an ever-growing list of crises. Conflict, poverty, hunger,
climate change, the wealth gap, the cost-of-living crisis,
migration, occupation, opioid addiction, the list goes on and on
and on...
Infact, I have a map here of the world with countries which are
facing some sort of crisis in red. Do you see any countries in
green who are not facing a crisis? You know why? Because we
are all deep in the red! Humanity is in crisis! And in many cases
its manmade!

But we look the other way, continuing with business as usual.
While the alarms are ringing, the band is still playing the same
old tunes, as the whole ship descends deeper and deeper into
unchartered waters.

We need Nations United in harmony not a United Nations in
misery.

These are crucial times for the world, important years for my
country. In 2040, the Maldives will celebrate 75 years since
regaining its independence — seventy-five years as a sovereign
nation. As we look forward to that milestone in our nation’s life:
What can we hope to achieve? What do we wish to accomplish?
And is the world ready to play its part?

I took office as the President of Maldives, last November. Duty-
bound by the aspirations of my people. The same aspirations I
hold dear to my heart. Not just for the present, but for the future,
too.

Today, I am here at the United Nations, with a vision of where I
want to take my country.

By 2040, I wish to see the Maldives as a full-fledged developed
nation.
A nation that commands respect, is relevant, and one that
embodies resilience. A society that is inclusive and just. A
country that exemplifies sustainability and democratic
governance.

Destiny is not mere fate. It’s the consequence of the many choices
we make. The many decisions we take. And the many hours we
work.

Becoming a developed nation may seem like a daunting task,
and a distant possibility. But I can tell you this. With a goal in
sight, and a plan in hand, it is achievable.

Because, prevailing and even flourishing against formidable
odds, is nothing new for Maldivians.

In 1965, when we regained our independence, we were among
the poorest countries in the world. One-third of our population
was illiterate. More than one out of every 10 babies were dying
before their first birthday. We had no industries, barely any
exports, and even
fewer prospects.

And in just five decades, we have reached upper middle-income
status.
A feat we are incredibly proud of.

I believe the Maldives can become a developed country: By
investing in the country’s productive capacity and increasing its
productivity; By transforming our economy into one that is fully
digitised and driven by artificial intelligence; And most
importantly, by leveraging the natural beauty and marine
resources of the country.

Boosting productivity will be the key to economic
transformation. This we will do by reforming and strengthening
our institutions, increasing our State capacity, and leveraging
the private sector. We will also identify and implement policies
that support investments in key sectors — such as the digital
economy.

The Maldives has over One thousand one hundred islands,
spread over ninety thousand square-kilometres. Enhancing
digital connectivity is key to achieving inclusive development,
mobilising economic activity, and fostering a more diversified
and resilient economy.

We believe the future is intelligence driven. This is why we are
working towards a digital economy that can contribute up to 15
percent of our GDP by 2030.

This can be realised through investing in our ICT infrastructure.
We are using and expanding artificial intelligent systems to
deliver essential services such as healthcare, education, and
social welfare. We are also delving into cutting-edge applications
of 5G technology; using drones for medical supply delivery,
implementing smart road systems, and utilizing Al-enhanced
technology for erosion detection and environmental monitoring.

The transformation can be sustainable, only if we transform our
education and financial systems. We need to invest in digital
literacy from a young age — to build a generation that can use

4
artificial intelligence to enhance public service delivery, build
new products, and successfully compete in the global digital
economy.

We need to bridge the digital divides within the country.
Including through improving data collection and utilisation. We
need to strengthen the regulatory frameworks - strengthening
existing institutions, cultivating start-up ecosystems, and
providing the impetus for the future we envision.

Becoming a developed country will also require fostering new
industries. This is why we are also working on building a robust
financial sector in the Maldives. With this in mind, in May this
year, I set up the Development Bank of Maldives with a focus on
improving and investing in economic diversification.

The result we desire, is inclusive development; where equality
of access to opportunities is guaranteed; where women and
young people are key players in our development — not mere
spectators; and where every Maldivian citizen has adequate
housing.

To support these objectives, my government has launched a 6.5-
million-dollar loan facility. It’s specifically for women
entrepreneurs — of which 25 per cent is allocated to those with
disabilities. In the first phase, over one hundred projects will be
funded across 19 of the 20 atolls and Malé, and across 21
business activities. I have also recently launched a Presidential
Youth Advisory Board. This Board will advise and inform me
directly, on the needs and views of young people.
Inclusivity is at the heart of one of the most ambitious, large-
scale urban development projects in the country’s history — Ras
Male. This is my promise to the Maldivian people. A solution to
alleviate the long-term housing crisis. An urban oasis where
citizens can fully participate in all aspects of city life. Ras Malé
will utilise modular housing, leverage a_ state-of-the-art
transportation system that is accessible to all. It will be
developed as a climate resilient and safe island.

Tourism drives the Maldivian economy. My vision is to expand
the tourism sector further. This means, building complementary
industries centred around innovation and creativity. This
means, more sustainable practises in construction, emphasising
the importance of green and sustainable tourism.

We are also expanding our main international airport, our air
connectivity network and the fleet of our national airline.

These steps will support the expansion of the tourism sector, and
at the same time, generate more revenue for the country.

But tourism is also highly vulnerable to external shocks —
conflicts, calamities, and causes beyond our control can, and
have had, far reaching, critical implications.

We need the international system to anticipate and address these
threats. Threats, such as armed conflict, terrorism, violent
extremism, transnational organized crimes, climate change,
ocean degradation — crimes that transcend national borders.
Part of addressing these threats is to safeguard and protect
people’s fundamental rights.

In 2015 the world came together to endorse humanity’s
fundamental rights by committing to the Sustainable
Development Goals or SDGs. But 6 years to the SDG deadline
we're only on track in less than a fifth of those targets. In June
this organisation, the UN, issued a report saying the world is
failing to deliver on sustainable development goals.

This week we agreed on ‘A Pact For The Future’. But do we want
this document — The Pact to go the same way as this one, the 2015
SDG commitment?

I’m sorry but we can’t keep doing this. We can’t keep meeting,
talking, pledging but not doing. We don’t want these days to
come back to haunt us. The days when we had a chance but not
a will.

We believe the best approach to protecting fundamental rights is
to cultivate a culture of respect for those rights. This requires
support.

The Maldives has a good track record of treaty ratification,
implementation and reporting. We champion the right to
environment, because we are keenly aware of the consequences
of environmental degradation. We also believe that violation of
a right by any country — large or small, rich or poor, with
powerful friends or not — must not be tolerated.

This is why the ongoing massacre — the genocide — by Israel in
Gaza, is a travesty of justice and the international system. The

7
repeated destruction of homes, hospitals, schools, humanitarian
infrastructure; the repeated cycles of killings of men, women,
children, babies; thousands upon thousands. The world is
struggling to process the deaths of so many civilians in Gaza and
now Israeli raids in Lebanon are claiming hundreds more
civilians lives there. Their cries haunt anyone with humanity.
Their tears, bitter on our conscience

Israel’s targeting of journalists — the eyes and ears of humanity,
the killings of journalists, Palestinian journalists, Lebanese
Journalists, Al-Jazeera journalists, the closure of Al-Jazeera
offices — how can we interpret this as anything other than brutal
attempts to prevent the world from knowing about the crimes
taking place?

Israel must be held accountable for these acts of terrorism, for
these violations of international law & UN resolutions. We must
accept a sovereign and independent Palestinian State on the pre-
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We welcome the
decision to seat our brothers and sisters from Palestine with us
here in the General Assembly, for the first time, instead of behind
us. Now, we must ensure that Palestine becomes a full member
of the UN.

Mr President,
The Maldives is gearing up for an economic transformation that

will change lives. But our policies can deliver the desired results
only with sufficient international financial support.
The Maldives has always taken ownership and responsibility for
its own development. While we have received extensive support
towards our development, we urge the multilateral
development funds, banks, and bilateral donors, to view us as
your partners. Not just as recipients of aid; to stop looking at our
inherent vulnerabilities as limitations; to adopt tailor-made
approaches which are mutually beneficial; to reduce the cost of
borrowing; to make the financial system work for us — not
penalize us; to make your terms flexible; your financing less
rigid; to make your lending targeted, affordable, and
responsible.

Mr President,

Climate change is the most serious threat to our world; the
defining challenge of our generation. It’s washing away decades
of progress in mere minutes. It’s diverting already depleted
resources from long-term development to emergency relief and
reconstruction. Preventing countries from adapting to climate
impact. And the vicious cycle continues.

The Maldives has always walked the talk. We are investing in
renewable energy. Our goal is to have thirty-three percent of the
country’s electricity demand from renewable energy sources by
2028.

On behalf of the Maldivian people, I implore you. Do your part.
Act now.

We must face the climate emergency head-on. With science,
determination, and resources. The rich and emitting countries

9
need to meet the financial pledges already made — especially on
adaptation, where the financing gap continues to widen.

As we work towards COP29, we must ensure the new goal on
climate finance matches the level of climate action required. This
means: the new goal must go beyond 100 billion dollars. It must
include, as a minimum, loss and damage response, mitigation,
and adaptation, as sub-goals.

One of the biggest victims of the climate crisis is the ocean. The
Maldivian people and their livelihoods — are dependent on the
health and wealth of the ocean. We need to step up efforts to
sustainably use and manage our ocean resources: address plastic
pollution; conserve biodiversity.; and protect endangered
species.

This morning, I ratified the Global Ocean Treaty. We urge you to
do the same.

We urge you to do your part to address climate change,
overcome pollution, and reverse biodiversity loss.

The transformation the Maldives seeks cannot be achieved
without an enabling global environment. Small countries like
mine need a multilateral system that champions us. And delivers
for us.

The United Nations is the epitome of the multilateral system. It
is well positioned: to promote sustainable development; to
maintain peace and security; to promote and protect human
rights; to enforce equality, the rule of law, inclusivity, and
representativeness.

10
But what we are witnessing is the opposite: inability to stop
climate change and environmental degradation; inability to stop
war and genocide; inability to stop exploitation and suffering;
inability to stop unequal representation.

Hence, the United Nations needs reform and revitalisation. It
needs to be representative.

The Maldives cannot — and will not — watch and stand idle, while
the multilateral system fails; because our development, our
advancement, and our survival is tethered to the world.

That’s why the Maldives is seeking to get elected to the
Economic and Social Council for the 2027 to 2029 term. We count
on your support.

If elected, the Maldives will strive to make the UN development
system more relevant to our times. Continuously recalibrating
and adjusting. Utilising the latest science and evidence.
Listening to a variety of opinions and views.

The United Nations must enforce its decisions across the UN
system, and at the local level. The United Nations is only
relevant when it makes a real difference in the lives of people.
Mr President,

Fifty-nine years ago, the Maldives reached out to the United

Nations, as its first port, in a sea of uncertainty. We came here, to
this great Hall: seeking recognition, seeking a partner.

11
We came to you, as a poor, and impoverished country. But with
a vision for prosperity. A vision which we made great progress
on — with your support.

Today, once again, we come to you, aiming higher, to reach
further, and do better. With a vision to make the Maldives a
developed nation by 2040.

For I believe development is destiny. And our destiny beckons,
towards a brighter future. For the present, and future

generations.

I thank you.

12
