Ver 20

REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE

Statement
by
H.E.

MANUEL JOSE GONGALVES,
Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation

at the

General Debate of the 79th Session of the United Nations General
Assembly

Theme: “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of
peace, sustainable development, and human dignity for present
and future generations”.
NEW YORK, 30 DE SEPTEMBER 2024

Mr. President of the 79th Session of the United Nations General

Assembly;

Mr. Secretary-General of the United Nations;

Excellencies, distinguished Heads of Delegations;

Ladies and Gentlemen,

1. It is with great honor that | address this august assembly and

convey to Your Excellencies and all participants in this session,
a special greeting from His Excellency Filipe Jacinto Nyusi,
President of the Republic of Mozambique.

. We congratulate His Excellency Philemon Yang on his election
as President of this session and wish him success in fulfilling his
mandate. Our greetings are extended to the other members of
the Bureau. We assure you of our full support in carrying out
your duties.

. We also commend the positive work carried out by your
predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Dennis Francis, which
contributed to strengthening our Organization towards a
greater approach to the Peace and Development Agenda.
4. We extend a word of great appreciation to the Secretary
General of the United Nations, His Excellency Antdnio
Guterres, for his tireless dedication and advocacy in promoting
multilateralism for global peace and security.

Mr. President,

5. The current session of the General Assembly constitutes a
sovereign opportunity to reinforce multilateralism, our
collective action to consolidate international peace and
security and global stability, for the well-being of humanity.
These renewed commitments are reinforced through the
deliberations of the Summit of the Future and other important
High-Level events recently held.

6. We therefore welcome the theme of our General Debate,
which has particular importance due to its connection with the
future which requires urgency in strengthening international
cooperation so that, together, we can face the challenges faced
by humanity today to build a prosperous present and a
promising future for Humanity.

7. We are aware that in just 6 years, the 2030 Agenda will expire
and the progress made in its implementation is still tenuous. It
is urgent to mobilize the necessary resources for its financing,

3
as well as for other internationally agreed development
objectives, in order to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals.

8. Therefore, we encourage all Member States to accelerate the
materialization of the commitments made, including the
reinforcement of mutually beneficial cooperation, to respond
to prevailing challenges, including the fight against poverty,
conflicts, terrorism and climate change.

Mr. President,
Excellencies,

9. We express our optimism about our collective future, where
an environment of peace and security reigns. The functioning
of our global institutions must keep up with the current
dynamics that are imposed. Thus, we align ourselves with the
voices that defend the urgency of reform of the United
Nations, especially at the level of the Security Council, for
greater inclusion, particularly, giving a permanent voice to the
African continent, thereby correcting the historical injustice to
which it has been subjected.

10. We are encouraged by the continued collaboration between
the United Nations and the African Union to overcome
conflicts within the context of maintaining international peace

4
and security. Resolution 2719 adopted by the United Nations
Security Council on 21 December 2023 is a_ significant
milestone for African Union-led peace support operations. It
strengthens collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union, promoting greater regional and national
ownership of peace initiatives. We hope that it will effectively
ensure access to adequate, predictable and sustainable
financing required for the operations of the African Union.

11. We believe that this collaboration will contribute to giving
greater strength to efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts
towards a prosperous and peaceful Africa, the Africa We Want,
as established in Agenda 2063 of the African Union.

Mr. President,
Excellencies,

12. The concert between nations has been feasible throughout
these times due to the collective observance of the sacrosanct
objectives and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including the defense of the right to self-determination of
peoples, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States.

13. The escalation of tensions and conflicts in various parts of
the world is deeply worrying.
14. In Ukraine, unfortunately, there are still no encouraging signs
for an end to the conflict. We believe that the safest path is
dialogue between the parties. It is up to all of us, as members
of the United Nations, to persuade the parties to the conflict
to end hostilities and opt for a dialogue towards Peace
between these two countries.

15. In the Middle East, in violation of the principles of
international law and international humanitarian law, the
conflict continues to take human lives among the civilian
population, particularly children, women and the elderly, as
well as destroying civil infrastructure, causing the tragedy that
we unfortunately witness. We call for the cessation of
hostilities and the protection of innocent civilians from the
conflict. The vision of the existence of two sovereign states,
Israel and Palestine, as full members of the United Nations, is
the fairest formula that will ensure sustainable peace and
stability in this region.

16. In Africa, we are also concerned about the conflict in Sudan,
which has killed thousands of innocent civilians, including
refugees, causing an unprecedented humanitarian disaster.
We reiterate our calls to the parties to the conflict to end
hostilities and the need for dialogue to restore peace and
stability.
Mr. President,

17. The use of sanctions and other unilateral coercive measures
does not contribute to the preservation of peace, security and
sustainable economic and social development. Unilateralism is
contrary to the multilateralism of the Charter. In this context,
we reiterate our firm call for the total lifting of unilateral
coercive measures imposed on Zimbabwe and Cuba, as they
have significant negative impacts on the populations of these
countries, harming their rights and well-being, so as to allow
for a more fair and equitable development.

Mr. President
Excellencies

18. In January 2023, Mozambique assumed the biannual 2023-
2024 term as a Non-Permanent Member of the United Nations
Security Council. With three (3) months remaining until its end,
we would like to reiterate the honor and privilege we have had
in serving in the United Nations Body responsible for
maintaining international peace and security.

19. In the last two years, Mozambique has made its direct
contribution to peace and security in the world, collaborating
in addressing all topics on the Security Council’s Agenda,

7
including, highlighting Peace and Security in Africa, Combating
Terrorism, Women, Peace and Security and the Nexus between
Climate, Peace and Security. We presided over the body in
March 2023 and in May 2024. We are leading the AdHoc
Working Group for Preventing and Resolution of Conflicts in
Africa.

20. We will soon end our mandate. We reaffirm our
commitment to continue collaborating with a view to pursuing
the goals that guide the United Nations Security Council to
strengthen international peace and security.

21. We therefore thank all Member States for the support
provided to Mozambique during its mandate and reaffirm our
commitment to multilateralism and the principles and
objectives set out in the United Nations Charter, which have

guided our mandate since the beginning.

Mr. President,
Excellencies,

22. In Mozambique we continue to consolidate our young
democracy and citizenship, strengthening dialogue and
seeking consensus in the various forums of participatory
representation. In this spirit, the seventh Presidential and

8
Legislative Elections and for the Provincial Assemblies will take
place on the 9th of October.

23. In the fight against terrorism in the province of Cabo
Delgado, our vigorous action against this phenomenon has
resulted in progress, with the support of SADC and Rwanda
and international cooperation partners, despite the prevailing
challenges.

24. In this regard, we would like to reiterate our appreciation and
gratitude to all bilateral and multilateral partners who have
spared no effort in supporting us in the fight against terrorism
and for the restoration of peace and tranquility to the victim
populations and for the reconstruction of economic and social
infrastructures in areas affected by terrorist actions.

25. Furthermore, our country has faced multiple and complex
challenges that include exposure to risks associated with
climate change, such as cyclical cyclones, droughts and floods.
These phenomena cause, on average, economic losses of 1.1%
of GDP per year.

Mr. President,
Excellencies,
26. Finally, we reiterate the commitment of the Government of
the Republic of Mozambique to international Peace and
Security, which are essential factors for the well-being of
humanity and a prosperous world.

Thank you very much!

10
