STATEMENT DELIVERED
BY

HIS EXCELLENCY, SENATOR KASHIM SHETTIMA, GCON
VICE PRESIDENT, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA

DURING THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 797TH SESSION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

NEW YORK

247TH — 307! SEPTEMBER 2024

Check Against Delivery

Page 1 of 16
Mr. President,

As you assume the leadership of this august Assembly, our world
is confronted by profound moral questions that will require more than
the habitual remarks from this elevated podium to resolve. There are
questions about the ultimate purpose of our Organisation, the United

Nations itself, and how it can remain relevant and resilient.

2. It is with these sentiments that I convey to you the warm and
fraternal greetings of my countrymen and women, and to congratulate
you on your assumption of the Presidency of this Assembly. Let me
assure you of the full cooperation of my delegation in discharging your
onerous responsibilities during your tenure. In the same vein, I wish to
extend my appreciation to your predecessor, His Excellency, Dennis
Francis, for the many remarkable achievements recorded during his

stewardship.

3. It gives me particular pleasure to commend His Excellency, Anténio
Guterres, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, for his
commitment to the cause of peace and development, and the
democratisation of the United Nations to reflect the need to correct the
historical injustice that has been done to Africa. I am also delighted to
note the steadfast support given to the Secretary-General by our own
sister and compatriot, Amina Mohammad, Deputy Secretary-General,
while sharing the burden of responsibility in leading a complex

organisation like the United Nations.

Mr. President,
Page 2 of 16
4. The theme of this year’s General Assembly leaves us in no doubt that
there is still work to be done to bridge the gap between aspirations and
the realities confronting our world today. It also underscores the need
to remind ourselves that the United Nations stands for inclusiveness -
anchored on the tripod of peace, sustainable development and human

rights.

5. Today, these pillars of our organisation are threatened. They risk
being broken by the relentless pursuit of individual national priorities
rather than the collective needs of the nations that are assembled here
today. While commitment to multilateralism offers us the surest
guarantee of global action to address the existential challenges we face,
singularity and nationalism are undermining the aspirations towards

the peaceful and collective resolution of such challenges.

6. From last year's summit, and indeed from previous years, we have
carried over the numerous challenges of terrorism, armed conflict,
inequality, poverty, racial discrimination, human rights abuses, food
crises, hunger, irregular migration, piracy, global pandemics, hyper-
inflation, nuclear proliferation, grinding debt burden, climate change,
and a host of other vexations. The continued manifestation of these
challenges testifies to our failings rather than to any lofty achievements
on our part. Billions of dollars are being committed to the prosecution

of wars and the fanning of the embers of conflict.

Page 3 of 16
7. Yet, we always recoil from bringing out the resources we need to
build peace and to deliver life's necessities to people. The question of
governance is at the heart of our problems - and also the solution to
them. We recognised this in Nigeria when on 12th June this year, we
celebrated a quarter of a century of unbroken democratic rule. We are
no less proud of this achievement than the fact that during the last two

decades, a sustained process of democratisation has swept over Africa.

8. However, the return of unconstitutional changes of government and
forceful military take overs in some countries of the Sahel underscore
the fragility of democracy when it is not backed by economic
development and sustained peace and security. It is this fragility,
rather than the milestones that democratic governance has achieved in
Africa, that should matter most in our deliberations at this and other
High-Level Segments of the 79th Session of the General Assembly.
While we abhor all forceful changes of government, we can also
recognise the impatience in cities and villages at the sometimes slow

and grinding turn of the wheel of democracy.

9. Our people need employment. They need decent livelihoods. They
desire good and affordable education and healthcare for their children
and families. They need to live in healthy, safe and secure
environments. They need hope and they need opportunity. They desire
to live in peace and tranquillity, to pursue whatever gives them
happiness and contentment. When governments fail to deliver, the
people are bound to question the utility of democracy and other ideals,

like rule of law.

Page 4 of 16
10. The global debt burden undermines the capacity of countries and
governments to meet the needs of their citizens. Creeping trade barriers
and protectionist policies are destroying the hopes for prosperity of
peoples and nations. Unbridled competition rather than cooperation is

discouraging incentives and driving away investments.

11. Above all, general insecurity is driving people into unprecedented
hardship and misery that in turn, affect the people's confidence in
democracy. It is the duty of the international community to bring back
confidence in democratic rule and constitutional order, by paying more
attention to the needs and aspirations of the people, rather than paying
lip service to human rights, sustainable development and peace. We

need the substance of democracy, not just the form.

Mr President,

12. We cannot build durable societies with the threat of terrorism,
banditry and insurgency growing in our countries and regions. Indeed,
violent extremism remains an existential threat to both national and
international peace, security and development. We are making
concerted efforts to contain and rollback this threat. The High-Level
African Counter-Terrorism Meeting hosted by Nigeria in April 2024 and
its outcome - “The Abuja Declaration” - promises to provide solutions

to the challenges presented by terrorists and insurgents.

Mr. President,

Page 5 of 16
13. Climate change is a driver of insecurity, which also poses a veritable
challenge to sustainable development. A few weeks ago, large areas of
my country were inundated by seasonal flood waters, including one of
our largest cities, Maiduguri, in the North-East. Other parts of Nigeria

also experienced similar tragedies, occasioning the loss of lives and

property.

14. We need not remind ourselves to remain faithful to the
implementation of the commitments that we all gave voluntarily at the
various COP Meetings. Failure to do so is merely to postpone the

inevitable. No country is immune from the effects of climate change.

15. It is better that we cooperate and collaborate to meet this ever-
increasing challenge rather than remaining in our shells, waiting for
the inevitable to happen. A common challenge requires a common
solution. Nigeria stands ready to meet her obligations in terms of
mitigation and adaptation measures nationally and regionally, with the

active participation of other countries and international partners.

Mr. President,

Page 6 of 16
16. Conflict prevention is the main reason why the UN exists. But the
task of prevention becomes all the more difficult when conflict becomes
normalised, when even the condemnation of violence and civilian
casualties, and calls for a ceasefire, are somehow regarded as

controversial.

17. As we emphasised at the Abuja High-Level Ministerial meeting, we
must renew our focus on conflict prevention. Indeed, addressing the
root causes of conflicts is often the first step towards providing long-
term solutions. Clearly, some of the root causes of conflicts are social
in nature, including poverty, hunger, ignorance, inequality and
exclusion, as well as other forms of injustice. In Sudan, other parts of
our continent and further afield, foreign actors are exacerbating those
tensions to prolong conflict and deepen the suffering of innocent

people.

18. Today, we are all witnesses to the heart-wrenching situation in
Gaza and other Palestinian Territories. We cannot discuss war and
peace, conflicts and reconciliation or humanitarian imperatives today
without reflecting on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that has been

raging since 7th October last year.

19. Of course, the conflict predates this period and has been simmering
for a better part of half a century. What this tells us is that the
international community has failed to live up to the spirit and
aspirations of the United Nations to rid the world of inequality, violence
and domination of one people by another. Justice is antithetical to

revenge.
Page 7 of 16
20. Freedom is an inalienable right and a natural entitlement that
cannot be denied to any people. The Palestinian people deserve their
independence. They deserve to have a home of their own on territories
already recognised by this very Assembly and by international law,
which is being routinely ignored. Nigeria continues to urge efforts to
bring back on track the ‘two state solution’ that offers the prospect for

a new beginning for the region.

21. Nigeria reaffirms its commitment to supporting United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations. We recognise the need for Africa to build
strong and professional armies to meet the multiple challenges we face.
Consequently, we reiterate the call for international support to
operationalise the African Standby Force, in addition to the provision
of requisite support and resources to ensure the upgrade, take-off and
effectiveness of a Centre of Excellence on issues of counter-terrorism

in Africa.

Mr. President,

Page 8 of 16
22. Reform of the Security Council is critical if the UN is to strengthen
its relevance and credibility in our rapidly changing world. Some
permanent members of United Nations Security Council have offered
encouraging if tentative indications of support on the issue of reform of
the Council. We welcome the change in tone and urge an acceleration

in momentum to the process.

23. The Security Council should be expanded, in the permanent and
non-permanent member categories, to reflect the diversity and plurality
of the world. We fully support the efforts of Secretary-General Guterres

in this regard.

24. Africa must be accorded the respect that it deserves in the Security
Council. Our Continent deserves a place in the permanent members
category of the Security Council, with the same rights and

responsibilities as other Permanent Members.

Mr. President,

25. Your assumption of stewardship of the General Assembly
presupposes that you will be seized with the progress of the
implementation of the UN's Sustainable Development Goals. We note
that most developing countries are significantly behind in the
achievement of these Goals, largely due to a lack of resources available
to finance their implementation and the burden of unsustainable

external debt.

Page 9 of 16
26. It is our expectation that the adoption of the "Pact for the Future"
will change the narrative, reposition economies and translate into
concrete measures that provide solutions to the challenges faced by
developing and least developed countries. This is particularly
significant in our region and the Sahel, where human development

indices are low and depressing.

27. It is for this and other reasons that we reiterate the call by
countries, especially of the global South, for reform of the international
financial architecture and promotion of a_ rules-based, non-
discriminatory, open, fair, inclusive, equitable and transparent

multilateral trading system.

28. We are aware of the debilitating impacts of corruption on global
prosperity and national progress. Proceeds of corruption and illicit
financial flows constitute a huge chunk of resources needed for
sustainable development. The recovery and return of such funds to
States of origin is a fundamental principle of the United Nations

Convention against Corruption.

29. Therefore, the international community must promote practical
measures to strengthen international cooperation to recover and return
stolen assets and to eradicate safe havens that facilitate illicit flows of

funds from developing countries to the developed economies.

Page 10 of 16
30. There is also the urgent need to promote fair and inclusive tax
regimes in the world. Nigeria helped introduce the resolution on
“Promotion of inclusive and effective international tax cooperation at
the UN”. We acknowledge the progress made in the adoption of the
terms of reference of the UN Framework Convention on Tax
Cooperation. We should deepen this initiative and work towards a UN

Framework Convention on Tax Cooperation.

31. Similarly, we must ensure that any reform of the international
financial system includes comprehensive debt relief measures, to
enable sustainable financing for development. Countries of the global
South cannot make meaningful economic progress without special

concessions and a review of their current debt burden.

32. My government pays due regard to the imperatives of creating a
conducive national environment for investment and the ease of doing
business. Last year, I signed four Executive Orders to curb double
taxation. I also established the Presidential Taskforce on Review of
Fiscal Policy and Tax Reform. These measures are geared towards not
only boosting investor confidence in Nigeria, but also to ensure

investors make reasonable profit from their investments.

Mr. President,

Page 11 of 16
33. While the world is transitioning into the Fourth Industrial
Revolution, Africa remains energy deficient. The push for the
accelerated implementation of SDG 7: “Affordable and Clean Energy”,
therefore, must take into account Africa's precarious situation. Nigeria
believes that natural gas remains central to the search for solutions to
the energy challenges that Africa and the international community face.
Access to affordable, reliable, cleaner sources of energy is more than
an environmental or developmental issue. It is a key factor in social

peace and international security.

Mr. President,

34. Nigeria remains unwavering in its commitment to SDG 13: Climate
Action, including the net zero ambition and transition from fossil fuel
energy to clean energy. As a demonstration of this commitment, I
established the Presidential Committee on Climate Action and Green
Economy Solutions and appointed a Special Presidential Envoy on

Climate Action.

35. We will redouble our efforts to address the challenges posed by
climate change, including the urgent need to transition from fossil fuel
energy. Yet such commitments must be juxtaposed with the principle
of Common but Differentiated Responsibilities and the relevant
provisions of the Paris Climate Agreement back in 2015. The Paris
Agreement provided for developed countries to take the lead in the
quest to achieve net zero and to offer support, including finance, to

developing countries for the actualisation of the climate change goal.

Page 12 of 16
36. Worthy of note is the loss and damage funding for vulnerable
countries’ secured at COP 27 in Egypt and expanded in COP 28 in the
United Arab Emirates. It is our expectation that this year’s 79th
Session of the UN General Assembly and the upcoming COP 29 in
Azerbaijan this November, will go a step further by providing developing
countries, especially African countries, with access to the loss and
damage funds, including the 100 billion dollars pledged by developed

countries to mitigate the negative impacts of climate change.

Mr. President,

37. In this age of digital innovation, we must address the emerging
divide between the Global South and the Global North, which, with the
evolution of artificial intelligence, risks becoming wider still. The UN
should work towards eliminating barriers to digital economy in Africa,

such as high costs of Internet services and intellectual property rights.

38. Moreso, there is a need to work towards common global standards
to regulate crypto-currency trading platforms. This is the most effective
way to provide confidence in these new markets and limit the potential
for instability. Our own experience in Nigeria, as in other countries,
shows that new technologies, when not properly regulated, can
facilitate organised crime, violent extremism and human trafficking. In
our own case, the trading of crypto-currency helped fuel speculation

and undermined macro-economic reforms.

Page 13 of 16
39. Separately, we have also witnessed, in rich and poor countries
alike, the corrosive impact of unfiltered hate speech and fake news
across social media. There is much more that we could and should do,
together, to strengthen those guard rails that will help release the most
progressive elements of the new technologies shaping our world — and

curb those more destructive tendencies.

Mr. President,

40. We are particularly mindful of the imperatives of achieving the
advancement of youth and women as a factor in national development,
peace and security. Nigeria has developed its own National Action Plan
on Women, Peace and Security, as well as a National Action Plan on
Youth, Peace and Security, to ensure the participation of both women

and youth in the peace and security sector.

41. The "Summit of the Future" cannot be deemed successful without
setting clear, ambitious and achievable developmental goals to address
the various challenges facing our youth. In line with this aspiration, my
government will continue to invest in Nigerian youth through initiatives
like the revitalisation of the National Youth Investment Fund for 2024,

focused on youth empowerment and entrepreneurship.

Mr. President,

Page 14 of 16
42. As much as the global family still grapples with the crippling
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, the greatest lesson that we
have learnt is never again to take any health situation with levity. In
line with SDG 3, we must continue to work together to ensure the good
health and well-being of all. There is no disease that should be
relegated to the background due to some perceived classification of

their seriousness or importance.

Mr. President,

43. Migration is a complex and polarising issue that impacts on rich
and poor countries alike. Nigeria is a country of origin, transit and
destination. We are a major stakeholder in the global migration
dynamic, and understand the challenges and benefits it brings.
Accordingly, I wish to reiterate our support for the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration (GCM). The GCM, which all of us
should continue to support, represents our collective efforts at

providing major safeguards for the treatment of migrants.

Mr. President,

44. I will conclude by reaffirming Nigeria’s steadfast commitment to the
deepening of multilateralism, just as we did sixty-five years ago on this
podium when we joined the United Nations as the 99th Member-State.
We remain committed to that “desire to remain friendly with all nations
and participate actively in the works of the United Nations”, as
expressed by our founding Prime Minister, Sir Abubakar Tafawa

Balewa.

Page 15 of 16
45. It is my hope that our deliberations this year will result in solutions
that would address our collective challenges and accelerate the
attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals, as well as the
advancement of peace and human dignity for the sake of present and

future generations.

I thank you.

Page 16 of 16
