Gobierno de Reconciliacién y Unidad Nacional
Unida Nicaragua Triunfa

y~%

MESSAGE FROM THE GOVERNMENT
AND THE PEOPLE OF NICARAGUA
FOREVER BLESSED AND FREE

After listening to so much analysis and to the
descriptions of so many misfortunes and
calamities, all the detail of the holocausts

that afflict us as a Human Family...

After seeing and observing the brilliance of
so much Intelligence, we are left with silence,
with emptiness, because while we know, or may think
we know, we do not find, we do not perceive,
shared responses to the fragility and pain of
our Societies, to the abuses and aberrations, to
the aggression of the world's Powers, or to the
unjust World Order that in every aspect seems
instead to be suffocating us more and more,

despite our Knowledge, our Experience, and the
Spirit that as Human Beings we need to nourish,

in order to better enlighten ourselves.

The catastrophes of injustice, the pretension
of Supremacy, the perverse appetites of
domination, subjugation and barbarism, as in
the most terrible times of what have been
called Colonization or Conquest, seem to get
worse, perpetuating the slavery of Humanity to
its most ignoble feelings, to avarice, to
covetousness, and to the imposition of one
over another, moving away the principles and
values of Equality and Rights which, after so
much Suffering, Humanity and Intelligence were

thought to have been secured.

Cataclysm after cataclysm, we are spreading
war as the savage method of Imperialism while
Capitalism, also savage, barbaric and fierce,
leads towards the extinction of all Living

Beings by refusing to accept that only Peace
should prevail. Because Peace is Justice. It
is Harmonious Coexistence. It is Respectful
Cooperation. It is the advancement of the Freedom,
Dignity and Sovereignty of Peoples, which
ensures for all of us, the Best of Times

in all History.

But Peace appears today as among the most
ardent fantasies and dreams. We do not live
Paths of Peace, and of course, we do not enjoy
that Just and Lasting Peace which can be seen as
the Way to a World of Brother and Sisterhood,
of Joy and Solidarity.

Every morning we awake, in so many parts of
our planet, to find the dead and then more dead,
sacrificed at the bonfires of the insipid
superiority of the few... Dead and more dead
that weigh or should weigh on the conscience
of the warmongers, the merchants and traffickers

of apocalyptic wars, imposed by those who
with blood and fire, go razing Human Beings,
Cultures and Lands, enslaving and crucifying,
pretending that Life must be as they please,

according to their whim and convenience.

In this daily massacre, how many people are
lost, lost to us, especially in the sphere of
the most human and profound feelings and
emotions, of Love, Fraternity and Hope that Human
Beings seem to be abandoning. These values
are undoubtedly victims too of the Hell that
they market to us as Paradise, of the Satanic
Majesties who, ignoring the tragedies they
inflict, forget the most elementary and basic
Principle of Civilization, which should be
Power for Everyone and for the Good of

Everyone.

We lose our soul every day, not because we

sell it to the devil, to the many devils,
but because our generations, who should have
learned so much from the millions of Human Beings
sacrificed throughout history at the bonfires of
vanity and ambition, of fatal egoism and
of unassimilated failure, the enemies of
Peace, seek and seem to be succeeding to turn
us all into the driest of deserts, in terms of
that Spirituality we do not see and do not
recognize, and of those Strengths of Human

Consciousness which we do not make good.

Given all the aggression, barbarities, attacks,
and crimes, among all the satanic, infernal
offensives, among all the evidence of Evil
overcoming Good, it has fallen to our Peoples
who know how to Fight, to our Culture and Spiritual
Experience “of Dignity and National Decorum".
This is our greatness. This is our most precious
heritage. This is God's kingdom on Earth. This is
the beginning, the dawn of a New World being
born amidst anxiety, suffering and pain, forced
upon us, imposed by those sick minds that do
not see, do not want to see, this other World,
and who continue trying to inhabit, for their
own benefit, despite being centuries overdue,

the old, bloodied World.

How much grief, how many battles, how many
chains, how much slavery, all forging the
steel of our Human Condition, which makes its
way from Truth to Truth, from Awakening to
Awakening, from Courage to Courage, from Daring
to Daring, every day accumulating, paradoxically,
More Glory and More Victories of True Truth, and
of the Human Spirit which we must, between

all of us, make prevail.

No one can steal from us of the certainty of a
New World. No one can snatch away from us the

reality of a Fraternal World of Understanding,
Solidarity and Respectful Cooperation, in

the Present and for the Future of Everyone.

In the Old World, designed by the "conquerors",
they will stay frustrated, sad and alone, with
the condemnation and repudiation of those who
have learned to revere Love, to banish the
grotesque impositions of Hatred, to bury all
the humiliation, the degradation and indignities,
and above all, to ignore the terror, the fear
which the Condemned of the Earth lash us with,
hoping to intimidate us.

Never on our knees! Never giving in to the
Enemies of Peace and of the Common Good.
Never slaves of selfishness or greed, and never
blind to the atrociousness some have made into
a Rule of Life, nor to the false narrative of
the hypocrites, who with artificial techniques
and tactics, with multicolored or technicolor
film, try to sell us and establish a childish,
fictional, paralyzed world, blind, deaf
and dumb, exonerating those who are guilty

of so many crimes against humanity.

We are not silent, and we will not be silent! We
denounce and condemn the genocide that the Goverment
of Israel and its allies in the First World have
committed, are committing and seek to continue to
commit against the Glorious Palestinian People,
against the Brave People of Lebanon, and against so
many other Brave, Valiant, Dignified Peoples who do
not subordinate themselves when faced with brutality.

We are not silent, and we will not be silent!
We denounce and condemn the aggression against
Syria, Iran and so many other great and combative

Brothers and Sisters on all Continents.

We are not silent, and we will not be silent! We
denounce and condemn the occupation and usurpation of
the Rights of Peoples and Countries, such as Haiti...
We are not silent, and we will not be silent!
We denounce and condemn the systematic policy of
extermination of Cultures and Rights that the
Colonialist and Imperialist Powers maintain
against Peoples, Governments and Countries,
such as Cuba, Venezuela, Bolivia, Nicaragua,
who integrate the Bolivarian Alliance for the
Peoples of Our America, ALBA, a strategic Unity
in Defense of our Sovereignty, Independence
and the Legitimate Customs and Models which we
exercise of Institutionality, of Protagonism

and of Participatory and Direct Democracy.

We are in solidarity with all the Countries
and Peoples affected by the bestiality, the
brutality that was unleashed and continues to
be unleashed against Our Mother Earth and our
Resources, generating what is known today as
Climate Change, which is nothing but the selfish
10

plundering of our Planetary Resources, which
has degenerated into a profusion of Disasters
of all kinds, which are not Natural and which
demand Climate Justice, and which have been
and continue to be imposed by the greedy slavers,
filibusters and looters of this World, with
neither consideration, nor indemnification, nor
reparation nor compensation, against those of

us with the most to lose.

We unite in Brother and Sisterhood, in Solidarity and
Complementarity in Just Struggles for Food
Security, for Health Security, for Security in
Education and Security of Rights, for Human

Security, Rights which we will never renounce.

We unite, of course, in the urgent and daily
Struggle against Terrorism in all its forms,
against Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime,
against the vices and criminal activities

that are imposed upon us so as to weaken
11

our Institutions, Models and Customs, but also
so as to strengthen Interference from invasive
Policies and Modalities that try and encourage us
to adopt customs and ways of Life that are
both alien to us and which at the same time
generate an image of pitiful incapacity or of

mendacity, which we in no way accept.

To the invaders and interventionists disguised
as sheep, in sheep's clothing but with the
jaws of wolves, we say: We are Peoples rich in
Culture, Resources, and Community Models. And
of Values too, which have been and are being
disfigured, defamed and stripped away... We do
not accept being turned into needy supplicants
before a facade of fake Kindness and Generosity.
The outside interests are obvious and this
form of interference in our own affairs is not
just unacceptable, but should be denounced as
completely inappropriate.
12

We have the right to all our Freedoms and to
the Supreme Dignity of our Spirit and Culture,
of Conscience and Conviction, of Learning and
of coherent, permanent and humble pilgrimage,
leading us us to learn from everyone, to incorporate
everything Good, and to discard and repudiate
everything that seeks to turn us into slavish
subsidiaries, kept divided by the strategies
of the Imperialists of the Earth.

We defend our Supreme Dreams, with Bolivar,
Marti, Sandino, Morazan, and so many Great
Beings who preceded us and who anticipated
the Duty to Fight, Fight and Fight, so as

to Overcome, Overcome and Overcome.

Nothing is free in this world. We must grow in
Consciousness and Heart every day, absolutely
lucid, absolutely clear, absolutely convinced

and consistent, because only the Unity of
13

the Peoples of the Planet will stop the
Imperialists of the Earth. Only our Union will
push them back, even as they continue to plot
their crimes, for we will discover them, undo

them, expose them, confront them, and defeat them.

In our Combative and Victorious ALBA we are
One with Chavez, Nicolas, and his Great
People, at all Times. We are one with the Cuba
of Fidel, Raul and Miguel, and their Dignified,
Formidable Resistance. We are one with Bolivia
and its much respected Ways. We are one with
Honduras and its challenges. We are one with
all of Mesoamerica and the challenges we all
face. We are one with Asia, with the Arab
Peoples, with the Peoples of that Black Africa

who also live among us.

We are one with the Russian Federation in

its Great Battles against bestial Fascism,
14

Battles which will be won by us all for

sure.

We are one with the People's Republic of China
that teaches us so much, transferring to us
its Magnificent, Great Experience of building the
Well-being of its People, and of Solidarity with
the whole World, for a Community of the Future.

We are One with all the Fighters and Warriors of
the World aligned with the Forces of that
Firmness and Dignity we have always had, such
that today, more alert than ever, we do not
allow them to crucify us. To the contrary,
Proudly and Joyfully we raise our Flags and
Banners, because we know that Humanity and the
Human Spirit must win, that we will win, and
we will prevail. Only in this way can we
preserve and enhance the Highest Ideals and
Values of Humanity of which we are all part.
15

From our Blessed, Dignified, Always Sovereign,
Christian, Socialist and Solidarity inspired
Nicaragua, our Embrace to everyone in the
World who wants Peace, Affection, Respect, Rights
and Well-being. With Everyone so, Always United,
We Go Forward, to the Always Further On of our
Victorious General Augusto Sandino, and of the
Immortal Poetry of our Great Rubén Dario, and his
Songs of Hope.

A great flight of crows stains the blue sky.
A thousand-year-old breath threatens plague.
In the Far East, men are being murdered.

Has the apocalyptic Antichrist been born?
Omens have been witnessed and wonders seen,
the Return of Christ seems imminent.

The earth is pregnant with pain so deep
that the dreamer, imperious, lost in thought,
suffers all the anxieties of the heart of the world.

Executioners of ideals afflict the earth,
locking up humanity in a shadowy pit
along with the brutes of hatred and war.
16

Oh, Lord Jesus Christ! Why do you take so long?
why wait to spread your hand of light over
these wild beasts

and make your divine banners brilliant in the sun!

It rises suddenly, pouring out life's essence
over so many crazed, sad or hardened souls,
so in love with darkness as to forget your sweet dawn.

Come, Lord, show us in all Your Glory;
come with trembling stars and dread of cataclysm,
come bringing love and peace across the abyss.

let your white horse, which the visionary witnessed,
care in and let that divine extraordinary clarion sound.
And may my heart be an ember of your swaying incense.

Rubén Dario

Today we remember the Nicaraguan Father,
Priest, Chancellor of the Dignity and Decorum
of our Peoples, Miguel d'Escoto Brockmann, who
fought for and bequeathed to us the Responsibility
of Striving for the Refounding of the United
Nations, so that they serve the Debate and the
Struggle for Justice, for the Right to Harmony
and to the Happiness of Peoples. The United
17

Nations as an instrument precisely of Nations
to denounce, condemn, reject and repudiate,
all the abominations and aberrations that are
committed against everyone, to encourage Goodness
and Affection, and to banish Evil, Reproach
and Hatred in our relations, which should be

those of Fraternal Coexistence.

Arise Peoples of the World!

The Earth must be Paradise

for all humankind!

The World will indeed be Different and Better
that's what we work for

that's why we unite together

that's what we believe in!

With all the affection of the People of Nicaragua,
of our President, Comandante Daniel Ortega,
and our Vice-President, Compafiera Rosario Murillo.

Managua, September 30th 2024
