Sultanate of Oman's Address at the 79th Session of
the United Nations General Assembly

H.E. Philémon Yang, President of the 79th Session of
the United Nations General Assembly,

It is a pleasure to extend to you and your country, the
Republic of Cameroon, our sincere congratulations on
your election as President of the 79th Session of the
United Nations General Assembly. We also wish to
express our appreciation for the efforts made by your
predecessor from the friendly nation of Trinidad and

Tobago during his tenure.

Page 1 of 10
We would like to take this opportunity to also express
our deep appreciation to His Excellency Antonio
Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, for
his tireless efforts in leading the United Nations and his
unwavering pursuit of upholding and implementing
international law, in the pursuit of justice and peace,
reflecting the United Nations' vision of a world where

security, stability, peace, and prosperity prevail for all.

The Sultanate of Oman reaffirms its full support for
your endeavors and those of the United Nations in
promoting international peace and security. We express
our strong commitment to the UN Charter, recognizing

the importance of the United Nations in embodying the

Page 2 of 10
hopes and aspirations of peoples for development and a

dignified and prosperous life.

Mr. President,

Oman's foreign policy is founded on a steadfast vision,
which embraces dialogue and tolerance as a means to
address all challenges and issues.

This is a vision aimed at achieving peace and building
relations based on mutual respect, positive cooperation,

and harmony among nations.

Mr. President,

The Sultanate of Oman—its leadership, government,

and people—believes in the use of legitimate and

Page 3 of 10
peaceful means to resolve conflicts and _ issues.
Accordingly, Oman calls for an immediate ceasefire and
cessation of hostilities in Gaza, Lebanon, and the Red
Sea region. We emphasize the need to address the root
causes of these conflicts by ending the illegal Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories and achieving
justice for the Palestinian people, based on a two-state
solution, leading to the establishment of an independent
Palestinian state with East Jerusalem as its capital, along

the 1967 borders.

Moreover, Oman stresses the necessity of granting
Palestine full membership in the United Nations and

ending the genocidal policies carried out by Israeli

Page 4 of 10
occupation forces against the Palestinian people,

alleviating the humanitarian suffering they endure.

Mr. President,

We believe in the importance of intensifying efforts to
de-escalate tensions, reduce conflict, and prevent
bloodshed by adhering to dialogue, the rules of
international law, the United Nations Charter, and
international legitimacy resolutions.

Respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
states and non-interference in their internal affairs
ensures that all nations and peoples can live in peace,

security, and dignity.

Page 5 of 10
Mr. President,
Oman continues to move forward with its social
protection programs through a comprehensive system
that supports various segments of society, including
women, children, the elderly, and people with
disabilities, in addition to social insurance and job
security programs. This reflects the progress Oman has
made in sustainable development and its ongoing efforts
to develop these programs in line with global best
practices, while continuing to provide educational,

health, and social care for all members of society.

Our nation also remains committed to supporting and
empowering youth, whom we consider the cornerstone
of the future and the key to sustainable development. We

believe that young people are the driving force behind
Page 6 of 10
innovation, growth, and progress, and we are dedicated
to creating opportunities that enable them to apply their
skills and contribute effectively to building a brighter
future.

Mr. President,

Oman emphasizes the importance of promoting respect
and peaceful coexistence among peoples. We call for the
fight against all forms of discrimination, racism, hatred,

and violence.

Oman also exerts significant efforts in addressing
climate change challenges, reducing emissions, and
encouraging investment in renewable energy projects.

Our Net-Zero Carbon Strategy for 2050 is driven by
Page 7 of 10
clean energy projects, green hydrogen initiatives, and
nature-based solutions. This commitment stems from
our belief in the importance of protecting the
environment and preserving natural resources for future
generations, while balancing economic development

with environmental sustainability.

Mr. President,

Oman's development efforts are in line with our national
vision, Oman Vision 2040, which serves as the
foundation for achieving economic and _ social
development goals and addressing future challenges.

In this context, Oman has submitted its second
Voluntary National Report, reflecting its deep

Page 8 of 10
commitment to the global principles and objectives of
sustainable development, highlighting the progress

made in various developmental areas.

In this regard, we welcome the adoption of the Pact for
the Future this year, and we commend the collective
international efforts that led to this achievement, which
outlines a roadmap for the world to enhance
international cooperation and effectively address global

challenges.

Therefore, we urge all member states to commit to
implementing this charter and working towards its
vision and goals through fruitful cooperation,

knowledge exchange,
Page 9 of 10
and taking it as a path towards achieving a better, safer,

and more prosperous future for generations to come.
Distinguished audience,

Thank you for your attention. We express our sincere

hope that this session will be successful and fruitful.

Peace, mercy, and blessings be upon you.

Page 10 of 10
