Bas yl pes ll al ata

Mr. President,

Heads of State and Government,
Excellencies,

Delegates,

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Assalam-o-Alaikum!

2. It is a matter of great honour for me, to
address the United Nations General Assembly for
the second time, as the Prime Minister of a
country, that has always been a _ pro-active
member of the UN family.

3. | would like to congratulate and wish you
success, Mr. President, on your election, as the
President of the 79th Session of the UN General
Assembly.

4. | also thank Ambassador Dennis Francis, for
his skilful stewardship of the 78th Session of the
UNGA.
Mr. President,

5. The Father of our nation, Quaid-e-Azam
Muhammad Ali Jinnah, declared in 1947 that “we
stand by the United Nations Charter and will
gladly make our full contribution to peace and
prosperity of the world.” Pakistan has stood by
this commitment!

6. Today, we are facing most daunting
challenges to the world order: Israel’s genocidal
war in Gaza; a dangerous conflict in Ukraine;
destructive conflicts across Africa and Asia; rising
geopolitical tensions; resurging terrorism; rising
poverty; stifling debt, and the mounting impact of
climate change. We feel the chill of a new Cold
War!

7. In response to these challenges, our
Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres called for
the Summit of the Future. It led to the adoption,
earlier this week, of the 54 actions on
development, peace and security, technology, and
global governance in the Pact of the Future.
Mr. President,

8. Today, | stand before you to express the
searing pain and anguish of the people of
Pakistan, at the plight of the people of Gaza. Our
hearts bleed, as we witness the tragedy unfolding
in the Holy Land, a tragedy that shakes the very
conscience of humanity.

9. Can we, as human beings, remain silent
while children lie buried, under the rubble of
their shattered homes? Can we turn a blind
eye to the mothers, cradling the lifeless bodies
of their children? This is not just a conflict;
this is systematic slaughter of innocent
people; an assault on the very essence of
human life and dignity. The blood of Gaza’s
children stains the hands of not just the
oppressors, but also of those who are
complicit in prolonging this cruel conflict.

10. When we ignore their endless suffering, we
diminish our own humanity. It is not enough to

3
condemn; we must act now and demand an
immediate end to this bloodshed. We must
remember that the blood and sacrifice of the
innocent Palestinians will not go to waste.

11. We must work for a durable peace through the
Two-State solution. We must seek a viable,
secure, contiguous and sovereign State of
Palestine, based on the pre-1967 borders, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its eternal capital. And to
advance these goals, Palestine must also be
immediately admitted as a full member of the
United Nations!

Mr. President,

12. In a span of a few days, Israel's unrelenting
bombing of Lebanon, has killed over 500 people,
including women, and even small children.

13. The failure to implement UN resolutions has
emboldened Israel. It threatens to drag the entire
Middle East into a war, whose consequences
could be grave and beyond imagination.

4
Mr. President,

14. Like the people of Palestine, the people of
Jammu and Kashmir ‘too’ have struggled for a
century for their freedom and right to self-
determination.

15. Instead of moving towards peace, India has
resiled from commitments to implement the
Security Council resolutions on Jammu _ and
Kashmir. These resolutions mandate a plebiscite
to enable the people of Jammu and Kashmir to
exercise their fundamental right to _ self-
determination.

16. Since 5 August 2019, India has _ initiated
unilateral illegal steps to impose what it’s leaders
ominously call, a “Final Solution” for Jammu and
Kashmir.

17. Day in and day out, nine hundred thousand
Indian troops terrorize the people of occupied
Jammu and Kashmir, with draconian measures,
including prolonged curfews, extra-judicial killings

5
and the abduction of thousands of young
Kashmiris.

18. At the same time, in a classic settler-colonial
project, India is seizing Kashmiri lands and
properties, and settling outsiders into occupied
Jammu and Kashmir, to transform the Muslim-
majority into a minority. This hackneyed tactic is
employed by all occupying powers, but it has
always failed. In Jammu and Kashmir too, it
shall fail, InshaAllah!

19. The Kashmiri people are resolute in rejection
of the false Indian identity that New Delhi seeks to
impose upon them. India’s policy of brutal
coercion and oppression in occupied Kashmir has
ensured that Burhan Wani’s legacy continues to
inspire the struggle and sacrifices of millions of
Kashmiris.

Inspired by the legitimacy of their epic struggle,
they remain defiant. Their heart-wrenching
stories remind us that behind every statistic lies
a human life, a dream deferred, and a hope
shattered.
20. Even more worryingly, India is engaged in a
massive expansion of its military capabilities,
which are essentially deployed against Pakistan.
Its war doctrines, envisage a surprise attack and
a “limited war under the nuclear overhang’.

21. Thoughtlessly, India has spurned Pakistan’s
proposals, for a mutual “Strategic Restraint
Regime”. Its leadership has often threatened to
cross the Line of Control and “take-over” Azad
Kashmir. Let me state in no uncertain terms
that Pakistan will respond most decisively to
any Indian aggression.

22. To secure durable peace, India must reverse
the unilateral and illegal measures, it has taken
since 5 August 2019 and enter into a dialogue for
a peaceful resolution, of the Jammu and Kashmir
dispute, in accordance with the UN Security
Council resolutions and the wishes of the
Kashmiri people.
Mr. President,

Remember! Illegal occupation creates a fresh
hell, every day, in the killing fields of Palestine,
and in occupied Jammu and Kashmir.

Mr. President,

23. Apart from conflicts, the 21st Century has
brought a cascade of crises including the reversal
of development and the mounting impact of
climate change.

24. Two years ago, my country was devastated by
catastrophic floods, causing $30 billion in
damages. It is now clear that each summer will
bring blistering temperatures and trigger fresh
climate impacts. Pakistan emits less than 1% of
carbon globally; yet we have paid a very heavy
price for no fault of ours. This is unfair in any
calculus of global justice. We must uphold the
axiom: the polluter pays!
25. Pakistan looks forward to fulfilment of
commitments made by our development partners
to support the achievements of the SDGs and
climate goals, including a new annual goal beyond
$100 billion in climate finance.

Mr. President,

26. With nearly 100 developing countries, trapped
in the vicious cycle of debt and liquidity crisis-
which | call a “death trap” rather than “debt
trap”. Achieving the SDGs in these circumstances
remains a distant mirage.

27. The international financial architecture —
which the Secretary-General has described as
“morally bankrupt” — and the world trade and
technology regimes must be reformed and aligned
to promote development and global equity.

Mr. President,
28. Since assuming office in March this year, the
well-being and prosperity of my 240 million
people, has been my singular focus.

29.We have taken difficult but necessary
decisions that have rescued our economy from
collapse; restored macroeconomic _ stability;
controlled fiscal deficits and strengthened our
reserves. As a result, inflation has come down to
a single digit and the prospects for economic
growth have revived.

Mr. President,

30. Situated at the crossroads of South and
Central Asia, and the Middle East, we have
prioritized geo-economics and regional
connectivity to secure win-win outcomes for our
people. The second phase of the landmark China-
Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC), has been
successfully launched.
31. Through the apex Special Investment
Facilitation Council (SIFC), we are mobilizing
investments, in resilient infrastructure, renewable
energy, minerals, sustainable agriculture and
technology. This will herald a new era of
development and modernization.

Mr. President,

32. For two decades, Pakistan has_ fought
terrorism boldly and most’ successfully,
defeating terrorist groups within Pakistan. We
have paid a heavy price — 80,000 of our brave
soldiers and civilians have been martyred,
including innocent school going children. Our
economy has suffered a loss of $150 billion.

33. Unfortunately, today we are again confronted
by a new surge of externally financed and
sponsored terrorism, especially by the TTP/Fitna
al-Khawarij and its associates.

34. Make no mistake, we are determined to
eliminate this threat as well, through our
comprehensive national effort, “Azm-e-lstehkam”

11
(Resolve to Promote Stability). And, we will work
collectively with the international community to
combat all forms of terrorism and reform the
global counter-terrorism architecture.

Mr. President,

35. Pakistan seeks the’ earliest possible
normalization of the situation in Afghanistan. We
join the UN’s appeal for $3 billion in humanitarian
assistance to the millions of suffering Afghans.

36. At the same time, we endorse and share the
international expectation, that the Afghan Interim
Government would respect human _ rights,
including the rights of women and girls, and
promote political inclusion.

37. In particular, the Interim Government must
take effective action, to neutralize all terrorist
groups within Afghanistan, especially those
responsible for cross-border terrorism against
neighbouring countries. These include ISIL-K
(Daesh), the Al-Qaeda-affiliated TTP/Fitna al-

12
Khawarij and others, such as the ETIM, IMU and
Ansarullah.

Mr. President,

38. Another troubling global development is the
escalation of Islamophobia, which is now
manifested, by frequent desecrations of the
Holy Quran, attacks on mosques, negative
stereotyping of Muslims and acts. of
discrimination and violence against them.

39. The most alarming § manifestation of
Islamophobia is the Hindu supremacist agenda in
India. It aggressively seeks the subjugation of 200
million Muslims and the obliteration of India’s
Islamic heritage.

40. Pakistan and the OIC will work with the UN

Secretary-General and his Special Envoy to
implement a plan of action to combat this scourge.

Mr. President,
41. Pakistan seeks an immediate end to the tragic
conflict in Ukraine, and its peaceful resolution, in
accordance with the UN Charter and international
agreements.

42. Pakistan has a long and proud history of
solidarity, friendship and cooperation with the
nations of Africa. We will continue to cooperate
with them to counter terrorism, and resolve
regional conflicts, including through UN
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in Africa.

Mr. President,

43. As we leave this august hall, we must carry
with us a message for our people that the weak
are not voiceless, that the oppressed should
not lose hope, that poverty is not pre-ordained,
and that the Almighty’s promise of justice and
equality in our only terrestrial home, must be
respected!

I thank you!
