Statement by the President of the Republic of Poland
H. E. Andrzej Duda
General debate of the 79t* session of the
United Nations General Assembly
New York, 24 September 2024

Distinguished Mr. President,
Your Excellencies,
Honorable Delegates,

I would like to express my sincere congratulations to His Excellency
Mr. Philémon Yang on his election to the honorable position of
President of the 79th Session of the United Nations General
Assembly. Poland fully supports your mission, Sir, and wishes you
every success. I also extend my thanks to His Excellency Mr. Dennis
Francis for his effective presidency during the previous, 78th
session.

Mr. President,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

I am honored to address the United Nations General Assembly for
the tenth time as President of Poland. All the more so because
today we are facing huge global challenges that require our
solidarity, cooperation and determination. Our presence here
reminds us of the mission for the fulfilment of which the United
Nations was established after the terrible tragedy of World War II
- to prevent further conflicts and ensure world peace.

This year marks the 85th anniversary of the beginning of that
massive conflict. The conflict which claimed millions of lives. It was
Poland which became its first victim. On September the 1%, 1939,
Nazi Germany attacked my Homeland, starting World War II. Two
weeks later, on September the 17, the Soviet Union also invaded
our country - as the ally of Nazi Germany fulfilling the agreement
between Hitler and Stalin, so called Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact. Both
aggressors deprived us of our independence.

Poland found itself in the midst of a brutal occupation of two
totalitarianisms, becoming a witness and victim of war crimes that
forever left a mark on our nation's and world’s history.

In my country we know very well what war is, and we know what
drama and suffering it brings. That is why Poland has always been
a strong advocate of measures which aim at preventing conflicts
and ensuring peace in the world. Our history and experiences
incline us to constantly recall the need to respect international law
and protect the sovereignty of states.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Today we are facing, yet again, an extremely serious threat to
global security. For the past two and a half years, we have seen
Russia's brutal aggression against neighboring Ukraine. This is
a flagrant violation of fundamental norms of international law, such
as the prohibition of the use of force in international relations. This
unprovoked aggression is destabilizing the region and posing
a direct threat to the global order and security. We cannot allow
this war to turn into another frozen conflict. This is the most
important task for the future.

That is why it is so important today to stop the Russian war in
Ukraine. Not only to end the suffering of the people and punish the
aggressor, but also to prevent such heinous actions from becoming
a model for others to follow. Ukraine's territorial integrity must be
restored within its internationally recognized borders.

The logic of conquest and disregard for international law must be
stopped. Unless we agree to live in a world where any country can
become a victim of aggression, regardless of its size and geographic
location.

Poland is following, with equal concern, the situation in the Middle
East, where due to the brutal Hamas attacks of October the 7th,
2023 the conflict has escalated. Israel, like any other state, has the
right to self-defense. However, these actions must follow
international humanitarian law.

Poland has consistently supported a two-state solution to the
Middle East conflict that will guarantee both Palestinians and
Israelis the right to live in peace and security, in correct relations
with all the neighbors.

As proponents of the principles of equality and the right of nations
to self-determination, we believe that the emergence of an
independent Palestine will not contradict Israel's interests, whereas
the right of Israel to exist cannot be questioned. The two nations
are united by space and time, which will remain their common
destiny.

The current situation in Yemen is also of deep concern to us. The
ongoing humanitarian crisis affects millions of people, and the
struggle for control in the country poses a threat to regional
security and freedom of navigation in the Red Sea. The
international community must do everything possible to ease the
suffering of the Yemeni people and restore stability in their country.

And we all see how the ongoing wars, conflicts and terrorist actions
in Africa undermine people's efforts to live and develop in safe and
fair conditions. The world must stand with all those affected by
insecurity and help them to restore peace through reconciliation
and social cohesion.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

Peace and security in the world will not be possible to achieve
without respect for the law. As President of Poland, I consistently
repeat the phrase “Peace through law,” always emphasizing the
fundamental role of international law in maintaining global order.
Our history, our experiences teach us that only adherence to
international norms and the protection of the rights of every human
being can ensure stability and development.

Poland, as a country of freedom and solidarity, will always demand
respect for human rights, regardless of geographic location.
Therefore, Poland has decided to apply for a seat on the UN Human
Rights Council for 2029-2031. Our candidacy is an expression of
our commitment to the promotion and protection of human rights
around the world. We believe that human rights are the foundation
of peace and security - their violation leads to conflicts, while their
protection results in stability and development.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Poles perfectly understand the perspective of countries that
experienced colonialism. Our history - from losing our statehood in
the 18 century, to World War II, to the fall of communism - has
taught us how precious freedom, sovereignty and human dignity
are. Itis a part of our DNA and therefore we stand together with
the developing countries in their quest for prosperity, equal
treatment and self-reliance.
That is why Poland will not stop supporting African societies, as
I had the opportunity to personally assure my friends during this
year's visits to Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania, as well as in recent
years during my earlier visits to the continent, which is so important
for Poland, Europe and the whole world in building a common, safer
and more prosperous future. We believe that Africa has the
potential to develop its own solutions to its challenges.

However, we recognize that global development in many parts of
the world currently is facing serious obstacles. We note with
concern that halfway through the deadline set by Agenda 2030 for
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, progress made in
realization of its ambitions is still insufficient.

During this session, Poland will serve as Vice President of the
UN Economic and Social Council. The motto of our mandate in the
ECOSOC is “Developing in Solidarity” which summarizes well our
vision of progress we need.

With its presidency of the Council of the European Union starting
on January the ist, 2025, Poland will seek to give new impetus to
relations with developing partners. There is a need for better
cooperation, real partnership, more solidarity!

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Next year we will celebrate the 80th anniversary of the United
Nations. Despite its imperfections, the UN remains the foundation
of the world order, allowing us to work together for peace,
development and human dignity. We believe that the Summit for
the Future has given us an opportunity to reflect on the
effectiveness of our work and the possibility of improving the UN
structures to make them more responsive to contemporary
challenges.

Poland is ready to discuss reforms to the Security Council, other
key UN bodies as well as international financial institutions. The
world is changing, and our system must change as well, in order to
better serve the global community.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Our common commitment, enshrined in the UN Charter, sounds:
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.” Poland
will remain faithful to this mission, and will support efforts for

peace, human rights and sustainable development.

Thank you for your attention and I wish us all fruitful deliberations.
