49) REPUBLICA
Z~ PORTUGUESA

GABINETE DO PRIMEIRO-MINISTRO

Speech by His Excellency the Prime Minister of Portugal
at the 79'" United Nations General Assembly

New York, 26 September 2024

Mr President [of the General Assembly],
Mr Secretary General,

Dear Heads of State and Government,
Excellencies,

Ladies and gentlemen,

I congratulate the President of the 79th (Seventy-ninth) General
Assembly, Mr Philemon Yang, on his election and wish him every
success.

I express special appreciation for the tireless work of Secretary-
General Anténio Guterres. The reforms he has promoted since
2017 have contributed to the effective improvement of the
functioning of the United Nations. He knows that he has Portugal's
full support.

As this is the first time I am addressing this magna assembly, I can

only recognise the weight of responsibility that falls on all of us,
the representatives of the peoples of the United Nations.

I am doing so at a particularly demanding time, marked by the
confluence of multiple global challenges and crises and growing
geopolitical tensions.

But I also do it with hope and confidence.

Hope because 50 years of freedom are being celebrated in my
country.

The Portuguese people, in freedom, clamoured for democracy,
peace and development. And so the arc of history was bent.
49) REPUBLICA
Z~ PORTUGUESA

GABINETE DO PRIMEIRO-MINISTRO

At a time when autocracies in many parts of the world are
jeopardising democracy, we have confidence in the strength of
freedom.

At a time when we are facing threats to peace, we have confidence
in the strength of multilateralism and collective responsibility.

At a time when development challenges are becoming more acute,
we have faith in economic growth as the engine of fair and
sustainable progress.

Mr President,

Excellencies,

Portugal is an uncompromising advocate of multilateralism as
a method of cooperation and organisation of the international
system.

That's why we support the Pact for the Future, adopted within the
framework of the Summit of the Future, which illustrates the
vision and reforming spirit of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres.

This Pact reflects a renewed source of hope in multilateralism and
in the three central pillars of United Nations action: sustainable
development, human rights and global peace and security.

It is with this confidence in multilateralism that Portugal, with the
continuity and coherence that characterises our foreign policy, is a
candidate for a seat as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council for the 2027-2028 biennium.

We are guided by the will to work to prevent conflicts, promote a
spirit of partnership and protect people in the face of traditional
threats such as terrorism and emerging threats such as biosecurity.
49) REPUBLICA
Z~ PORTUGUESA

GABINETE DO PRIMEIRO-MINISTRO

We are determined to contribute to a more just, peaceful and
inclusive international order, founded on international law and
based on the United Nations Charter.

Mr President

Excellencies

The Secretary-General said in "Our Common Agenda" that
multilateralism faces a fundamental dilemma: "to breakthrough
or to breakdown".

We do not hesitate. We want to move forward with the reform of
the global governance system to guarantee greater
representativeness, transparency, justice and co-operation.

This is the path that the Pact for the Future shows us: redesigning
the international financial architecture, promoting greater
alignment with the Sustainable Development Goals.

With Burundi, we led the Fourth International Conference on
Financing for Development (FFD4) to ensure that no country has
to choose between fighting poverty or saving the planet.

On another front, we are in favour of reforming the United Nations
Security Council to make it more representative, agile and
functional. Its composition is outdated and the absence of
representatives from some regions hampers its functioning.

Portugal supports the African Common Position and _ the
aspirations of Brazil and India to become permanent members.
Small and medium-sized countries, including small island states,
should also have their representation strengthened.

As far as working methods are concerned, we support the
limitation and greater scrutiny of the use of the veto. The right of
49) REPUBLICA
Z~ PORTUGUESA

GABINETE DO PRIMEIRO-MINISTRO

veto, before being a power, represents a responsibility. And that's
how it should be exercised.

Mr President

Excellence

The world is now more prosperous overall, but socio-economic
divides are widening. Eradicating poverty and hunger are the first
two Sustainable Development Goals.

But chronic hunger is on the rise, affecting one in ten people
globally. Acute food insecurity has almost tripled since 2016.

In this context, we welcome the Global Alliance Against Hunger
and Poverty, proposed by the Brazilian Presidency of the G20.

The hope we are talking about can only be realised if we are able
to respond to the needs of millions of people affected by conflict,
without regular access to basic necessities such as drinking water,
healthcare or education.

Ukraine, Gaza, Sudan, Myanmar, the Sahel and now Lebanon are
examples of the suffering of millions of people forced to leave
their homes and families.

I'm also talking about climate refugees. Rising temperatures, forest
fires (which tragically hit my country recently), droughts and other
extreme weather events have forced millions to move.

At the same time, disrespect for the rights of women and girls or
persecution on religious or sexual grounds has become more and
more widespread in various parts of the world.

The context of human rights protection is severely weakened and
threatened.
49) REPUBLICA
Z~ PORTUGUESA

GABINETE DO PRIMEIRO-MINISTRO

It is our collective responsibility to guarantee the respect,
protection and realisation of human rights, as well as the central
role of the United Nations in this matter.

New technologies, such as artificial intelligence, are an
opportunity, but they also create risks. The Pact for the Future
points the way to a virtuous balance in this area.

We must act to combat relentlessly all forms of discrimination and
hatred that undermine the cohesion of our societies.

In this context, we will continue to defend the rights of young
people. The High-Level Meeting of the General Assembly on
Youth, which, at Portugal's request, will be held here in a year's
time to mark the 30th anniversary of the World Programme of
Action for Youth, will be an opportunity to move forward on this
front. This is a priority for Portugal at home and abroad.

Mr President

Excellence

Peace is the primary objective of the United Nations. And here
too we must give a sign of hope.

The Russian Federation's war of aggression against Ukraine is a
flagrant violation of international law, which we strongly condemn.

The negative effects of this war - the food, energy and inflation
crises - are echoing around the world, with the greatest impact on
the most fragile regions.

We cannot accept the precedent of unilaterally changing borders
by force, in violation of the UN Charter.

Weare also deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation and
the dangerous escalation in the Middle East region. In view of the
49) REPUBLICA
Z~ PORTUGUESA

GABINETE DO PRIMEIRO-MINISTRO

events in Lebanon, we call on the parties to exercise maximum
restraint to avoid escalation.

We firmly condemn the horrific terrorist attacks perpetrated by
Hamas on 7 October 2023 and demand the release of all hostages.

We cannot

We will not stand by the humanitarian disaster and the growing
number of civilian victims in Gaza.

It is imperative to unconditionally cease hostilities, guarantee the
entry of humanitarian aid and respect for international
humanitarian law. It is also imperative to resume negotiations with
a view to implementing the two-state solution - the only one that
can bring peace and stability to the region.

Portugal is against the expansion of settlements, the confiscation
of land in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, and the actions of
settlers that constitute violations of international law and obstacles
to peace.

It is our common interest and shared responsibility to ensure strict
respect for international law and humanitarian law, as well as the
proper functioning of the international justice system.

Despite the progress made in some regions, the international
community has not been able to resolve conflicts that have lasted
decades or prevent new outbreaks of tension.

We need to step up our commitment to conflict prevention and
mediation, particularly in Africa.

I would highlight Portugal's consistent presence in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and European Union missions, with
national forces deployed in Mozambique, Somalia, South Sudan,
the Central African Republic and the Gulf of Guinea.

I would also emphasise the contribution of ECOWAS and the
African Union to the efforts to promote stability in the region. Only
49) REPUBLICA
Z~ PORTUGUESA

GABINETE DO PRIMEIRO-MINISTRO

African solutions will provide sustainable answers to the
challenges facing the continent.

Portugal supported the resolution that allowed for the
establishment of regular UN contributions to the financing of
African Union peace operations mandated by the Security Council.

We also support the Secretary General's proposals to establish
regular contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund.

Mr President,

Excellencies,

Portugal is a maritime country: ninety-seven per cent of our
territory is ocean. We understand the vital role of the ocean in the
global economy and in combating climate change.

We strongly support the sustainable management and
governance of the oceans and the development of a "new
sustainable blue economy" in line with the 2030 Agenda.

We consider capacity building in ocean-related matters a priority
and have designed a scholarship programme aimed at developing
countries, with a special focus on Small Island Developing States
(SIDS).

The International Agreement on the Conservation and Sustainable
Use of Marine Biodiversity in Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction
(BBNJ) was a victory for multilateralism. We will remain
committed to its entry into force.

Portugal is calling for a joint effort to finalise an ambitious treaty
to eliminate plastic pollution by the end of this year.

Climate change is the existential threat of our time.
49) REPUBLICA
Z~ PORTUGUESA

GABINETE DO PRIMEIRO-MINISTRO

Given the central importance of the climate-ocean-biodiversity
nexus, Portugal supported Vanuatu's initiative to request an
opinion on the obligations of states with regard to climate change.

We welcome the important opinion of the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea of May 2024, which, together with the future
opinion of the International Court of Justice, will strengthen the
legal framework on climate change.

The International Law Commission's Study Group on sea level rise,
co-chaired by a Portuguese woman, has been doing important
work in this area.

Portugal remains committed to investing in renewable energies
and phasing out fossil fuels. We want to incorporate 47 per cent
renewables into final energy consumption by 2030.

We have also favoured the introduction of innovative financial
mechanisms, including SIDS. An example of this is the
agreements signed by Portugal with Cape Verde and Sao Tomé
and Principe to transform debt into climate investment, thus
supporting the ener gy transition.

Mr President,

Excellencies,

The success of the 2030 Agenda is mainly in favour of the most
vulnerable groups. We cannot leave anyone behind.

The digital transition and emerging technologies represent a
renewed opportunity to facilitate a more prosperous, fair, inclusive
and sustainable future. Connectivity is a cornerstone.

The path seems clear: technological development needs to be
conceived through a human-centred lens and based on
international law.
49) REPUBLICA
Z~ PORTUGUESA

GABINETE DO PRIMEIRO-MINISTRO

Mr President,

Your Excellencies,

I'm very proud to speak to you in Portuguese.

As well as being the fourth most spoken language in the world as
a mother tongue, today uniting more than 260 million people on
all continents, Portuguese is an official and working language in
33 International Organisations, including the Community of
Portuguese Speaking Countries (CPLP).

The CPLP's ambition to have the Portuguese language recognised
as an official language of the United Nations is therefore legitimate.

Mr President,

Your Excellencies,

The legitimacy of the United Nations, its convening power and its
global normative authority, combined with its multidisciplinary
expertise, are some of its unique assets, which must be harnessed
in favour of our common causes and a shared vision of the future.

The road ahead is arduous and uncertain, but the goal has been set.
We will walk it with hope and confidence. The United Nations
and the international community can count on Portugal in this
endeavour.

Thank you very much.
