UNGA79

H.E PRESIDENT WAVEL RAMKALAWAN’S
GENERAL DEBATE PLENARY SPEECH
25" September 2024
NEW YORK

Theme: Leaving no one behind: Acting
together for the advancement of peace,
sustainable development and human dignity
for present and future generations.

Mr President,
Mr Secretary-General (/fin the room),
Excellencies,

Distinguished delegates,

Congratulations, Ambassador Yang, on your
election as President of the General Assembly for
this seventy-ninth session. | wish to also thank
Ambassador Francis for his diligent leadership

during the seventy-eighth session.

Mr President,

As the highest representatives of the peoples of the
world, we meet here every year in this institution
which promises to deliver peace, progress and

prosperity for all.
We must be frank.

Frank in our assessment of what we are doing for
the people that we represent and their interests

that we serve.

For my people of Seychelles, we must be critical of
our approach to the challenges of today, and plan

for the challenges of tomorrow.

The world is less secure than even just one year

ago.

Where we hoped that existing conflicts could be

resolved, we find ourselves in a situation more
tense and precarious. Flames’ stoked by
competition and distrust threaten to engulf those
who have no part in these conflicts - leaving us
gripped by a fearful atmosphere of instability,

exacerbated by the worry of expanded warfare.

We are in danger of losing sight of the values that

bring us together.

That transcend borders and cultures.

That are understood in all languages and present in

all ideologies.
We must revert to our foundational principles of
dialogue and _ cooperation. Without a_ stable
foundation, we cannot build our vision of a

peaceful, prosperous and sustainable world.

Our focus is diverted from the challenges requiring
our urgent and undivided attention. Challenges
affecting the core of people’s lives and equally

requiring solutions with people at their centre:

The climate crisis;
Ending poverty and hunger;

Ensuring that all have the indisputable right to a

decent and dignified life.
Our people have entrusted us to work together to

find solutions.

Mr. President,

Seventy-nine years ago, the permanent members of
the Security Council conferred upon themselves
the great responsibility of ensuring international
peace and security. To cooperate in good faith to
save future generations from transgressions of the

past.

With this great responsibility comes the
expectation that gross violations of the UN Charter
be dealt with resolutely, and impartially. We place
our trust in them to act in the common interest, to
prevent conflict and preserve human dignity.

6
The consequences of conflict are felt beyond the
direct and intolerable suffering of victims in
warzones and those displaced by fighting. In such
an interconnected world, we are all subjected to
inflationary pressures, elevated commodity and

energy prices, and other disruptive effects.

Widened and prolonged conflict risks affecting
smaller states like Seychelles trying not to get
caught in the crossfire. It is not our intention to
lecture the world powers nor attempt to prescribe
solutions to complex issues. We simply wish to
remind you of your duty and be reassured that
geopolitics will not supersede human rights and

international law.
Since its formation in 1946, the Security Council
has remained largely unchanged. Most of Africa

was under colonial rule then.

Seychelles joins the call for the UN and the Security
Council to deliver the reform being appealed for by
so many —- with the objective not to hinder its work,

but to bring inclusivity and perspective.

It is time to correct one of the many injustices to
which Africa has been subjected. Permanent
membership of the world’s primary peace-keeping

institution is a necessity.

The consideration by the Council of critical issues

such as sea-level rise brought by Malta last year,

8
and the broader climate-security nexus, has proven
that it is capable of reflecting new realities. The
proposal by the United States to include a rotating
seat for small island developing states is a welcome

and progressive one that arrives not before time.

Mr. President,

Climate change remains the foremost challenge
facing humanity, and failure to address its effects

will devastate current and future generations.

As a small island state, Seychelles understands
what it means to be vulnerable. A vulnerability that
cannot be ignored in the future we see for

ourselves.
We are on the front lines of the climate crisis, which
poses irreversible threats to our people, our
economy, and our way of life. Rising sea levels,
extreme weather events, and the degradation of
our oceans are stark reminders of the urgent need

for global action on climate change.

We have all made commitments, pledges and
promises to achieve large-scale reductions of
emissions to keep the goal of limiting global
warming to 1.5 degrees. To boost adaptation to
deal with extreme weather disasters and build

resilience to address future impacts.
But words are nothing without deeds and we have
to act urgently, in unity, to make the necessary

transition to a more sustainable future.

It is a choice — conscious, and intentional - to
continue down this path and decide that business-
as-usual in pursuit of short-term gains, is

acceptable.

World military expenditure has increased for the
tenth consecutive year, reaching 2.5 trillion dollars
in 2023. This makes even the highest estimates of
the funds - 100 billion dollars needed for loss and

damage - seem modest and insignificant.
This is a worrying reflection of the world’s

priorities.

It is unfair for SIDS to suffer the consequences of
these choices. We simply do not have the means to

cope with the disastrous effects of climate change.

| thank those who have contributed to the loss and
damage fund. The pledges made following COP28
should not be mere attempts to pacify us who have
been calling for remediation. We hope to take it as
a token of ongoing commitment and continued
action, given the expected rise in costs of dealing
with climate change. As the Secretary General said
yesterday: “those who shoulder the blame should

foot the bill”.
The international community cannot hope _ to
advance sustainable development when some race
ahead while others are left to struggle. No one
should be left behind, lest we forsake future

generations to a bleaker world.

The obligations outlined in the Paris Agreement are
the lifelines that give us a chance if all States did
their utmost to adhere to them. Our reliance on
fossil fuels is unsustainable and detrimental. We
must accelerate energy’ transition towards
renewables and mobilise investment in the
technology and infrastructure to give us any

prospect of real energy security.
Seychelles’ focus remains on_ nature-based
solutions to combat climate change while ensuring
economic _ sustainability and environmental
preservation. Our blue bonds demonstrate the
potential to harness capital markets for financing

the sustainable use of marine resources.

Mr. President,

Ambitious and innovative strategies of securing

long term economic development are futile

without finance that is accessible and sustainable.

The average debt-to-GDP ratio in SIDS exceeds
70%. It is crippling and impedes our development

by diverting critical resources away from where
they are needed most: in infrastructure, education

and healthcare.

Our vulnerabilities have been expounded, yet our
borrowing costs remain. high. Instead of

concessions, we are penalized for our vulnerability.

It is time to move beyond discussion and implement
real reforms in the international financial system to
address the preclusion of some_ vulnerable
countries, regardless of income status, from

opportunities to meet development needs.

We must also recognise the humanitarian
consequences of economic policies. Our work in

the multilateral system is undermined by unilateral

15
coercive measures that are intended to leave
economies crippled and governments unable to

advance dignity for their own people.

Mr. President,

The multilateral system remains our best hope for
addressing the challenges we face. As a small
state, Seychelles believes in the United Nations, for

we fear of a reality with no alternative.

In| a world more interconnected than ever,
multilateralism is the network that links our shared
values to achieve the vision that we have for our
world. One that is defined by our common interests

and not by our differences.
We are here to solve problems, not exacerbate

them. To listen, and not to dismiss.

We put our faith in this institution because we must

to prove to the world that we can work for it.

But it is up to us to make it work.

In 2023 we adopted the BBNJ Agreement and this
year Seychelles became the fourth State, and the
first in Africa, to ratify it. We urge other countries to
hasten its ratification so as not to delay its entry

into force.
This year’s fourth SIDS Conference in Antigua &
Barbuda shone a timely light on the challenges that
we face in a global economic landscape for which
we are ill-equipped to navigate. The Antigua and
Barbuda Agenda for SIDS provides the blueprint for
action over the next decade and we call on the
international community to commit to _ its

implementation.

The MVI resolution adopted here last month also
represents a triumph of the multilateral system to
consider new approaches to complex and evolving
issues. Its data and findings deliver the empirical
grounding for what we know to be true: that a
single-layered approach to development is no

longer accurate nor adequate.
A better understanding of precisely these
multidimensional vulnerabilities will be crucial for
the decisions that we take and, more importantly,

those taken on our behalf.

The Pact for the Future just adopted should rightly
usher in a new era of engagement based on mutual
interest and mutual respect. We must use it to
bridge divisions between nations on critical issues
of human rights, gender equality and the rule of

law.

One that accelerates the implementation of the
SDGs and shapes the international financial system

more fairly.
One that adapts responses to global crises in a
more coordinated way, and one that restores

peace, with a promise to preserving it in the future.

For Seychelles, the Declaration on Future
Generations should signal our commitment to
safeguarding the rights of all people who will be
born by the end of this century, most of whom in

developing countries.

People who should not be born into hardship. We
must envision a world where survival is not a
struggle. A world that ensures everyone’s right to

prosperity.
Basic rights should not be difficult to provide.

Mr. President,

| firmly believe that these are the foundations on
which our cooperation and progress should be
built. The things that our people need the most and
what should guide us to building a world that is

more secure and sustainable.

Let us strive to be the architects of a world where

no one is left behind.

Thank you.
