i Podklad pre PSR | 79.VZ OSN By stupenie vo vSeobecnej rozprave | New York, 24. 9.2024

VYSTUPENIE VO VSEOBECNEJ ROZPRAVE 79. VZ OSN £N (cca 15 min)

Mr President of the General Assembly,
Mr Secretary General,
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

It is an honour and privilege to address you
from this place. It's the first time for me in my
capacity as President of Slovakia.

The United Nations Organization -— which we
helped to found with our brotherly Czech nation
under Czechoslovakia's flag — has been here
for almost eight decades.

We could spend hours discussing _ its
imperfections or flaws. We have a legitimate
right to ask how the UN delivers on its core
mission. That is — maintaining peace,
guaranteeing international law and protecting
human rights. And most importantly -
why it fails to do so quite often.

Despite all its faults and failures, the UN is the
only truly global forum we have. It is the
backbone of the world order based on rules
and international law. The cornerstone of the
world as we know it. The UN is a vital
international ecosystem for most countries
in the world, including Slovakia.

Vypracoval: Rastislav Mojto, OZP 121
i Podklad pre PSR | 79.VZ OSN By stupenie vo vSeobecnej rozprave | New York, 24. 9.2024

The sovereignty of the majority is — to a great
extent — based on our ability to cooperate,
show solidarity, and look for points where
our often different interests meet.

It builds on our’ readiness to reach
a compromise and respect our diversity based
on shared’ universal values, rules and
obligations.

Especially in today's’ uncertain times,
it is a powerful pillar of sovereignty. Just like its
classic features -_ territorial integrity
or independence of action. The way
we cooperate tells a story about us. Where
do we belong? What do we reach for?
And eventually -— who we are - as people,
community, humanity.

Our joint confidence in the existing system
of international relations -— with the UN
as its key element — is what separates us from
chaos and arbitrariness. In other words — from
war and violence. There are countries and
entities among us_ that believe’ that
the absence of rules will be the breeding
ground for their future success.

Vypracoval: Rastislav Mojto, OZP 2z1
i Podklady pre PSR | 79.VZ OSN Ell wystipenie vo vSeobecnej rozprave | New York, 24. 9.2024
They believe that the force is above the law.
In reality - however — the collapse of a rules-
based system would eventually get back
at those who desire it the most today.

In Slovakia's immediate vicinity — in Ukraine —-
a war has been going on for almost 1,000 days
already. As a result of Russia's aggression,
which violated such basic principles
of international law as_ sovereignty and
territorial integrity. It is worth reminding that
our neighbour — Ukraine — legitimately defends
its country and its people’ according
to international law — including the UN Charter.

Every day, this war continues to destroy
the lives, the infrastructure and the future
of Ukrainian men and women. It is of no good
to Russia's people either as they die too.
The war has come to them as _ well.
The escalation grows. It is high time to start
looking for a peaceful, sustainable and just end
to this conflict - based on the principles
of international law and the UN Charter.

Looking at the world's geography, for parts
of the globe, it might seem like a local -
and by far not the only serious — conflict
the world faces today. Let us recall the
suffering of the people in Gaza after the horrific

Vypracoval: Rastislav Mojto, OZP 3z1
i Podklady pre PSR | 79.VZ OSN Ell vystupenie vo vSeobecnej rozprave | New York, 24. 9. 2024
terrorist attack by Hamas against Israel and
the casualties on both sides. Or the state
collapses in Haiti or Sudan — both followed
by humanitarian disasters. However — from the
international community's point of view — what
we see here is an existential struggle for the
nature and future of international law and
adherence to agreed rules.

None of us today can think that the UN can fully
prevent all wars and conflicts. In Ukraine,
the Middle East, Africa or elsewhere.
The reason — however -— isn't some kind
of alleged dysfunction of the organization and
its agencies. It is rather the lack
of joint political will in its highest body —-
the Security Council. On the other hand -—
it's a fact that the UN was born with powerful
and exclusive checks without’ effective
balances.

For years, there has been a_= general
understanding that the UN needs a deep
reform. Slovakia stands ready to continue
assisting this legitimate effort.

We see that we must rather look for effective
prevention, management and_ eventually
solutions to conflicts within local or continental
alliances.

Vypracoval: Rastislav Mojto, OZP 4z1
i Podklad pre PSR | 79.VZ OSN By stupenie vo vSeobecnej rozprave | New York, 24. 9.2024

The role of the UN remains central but the need
for partnerships with regional organizations
is growing. For us in Europe, it is NATO and the
EU. This is the only way for the UN — with its
foundations laid in the last century -
to withstand the threats and challenges
of the current one.

| don't find it appropriate or useful to divide
the world into 'Global North’ and 'Global South’,
East or West. Much more important is to look
at who respects our shared rules and
obligations and who doesn't. Who is interested
in making them stronger and acting by them.
And who is rather undermining them
or applying double standards.

All of us are far from perfect. However, it fills me
with hope that those of us who respect
our shared values and rules — form the vast
majority here. And those who despise,
systematically ignore, harm or apply these
rules only when it comes in handy - are only
a few.

It's often those who try to take apart not only
the rules but also the meaning of words.
In the flood of information and misinformation
that we face today - we must not renounce
the truth.

Vypracoval: Rastislav Mojto, OZP 5z1
i Podklady pre PSR | 79.VZ OSN Ell vystupenie vo vSeobecnej rozprave | New York, 24. 9. 2024

The reverse is still the reverse, not the face.
A lie is just a lie, not a fact of an alternate
reality. Aggression is no defence. Occupation
is no ‘brotherly help’, liberation or some
mythical togetherness. Likewise, war remains
war, no matter what euphemism they call it.

We must not forget that words and those who
speak them -— including traditional and social
media -remain the most powerful weapons —
determiners of good and evil. They can both
fortify or disrupt unity and trust in our societies
and communities. They can promote tolerance
or spread hatred.

It is of utter importance that we speak out
against those who abuse words by giving them
alternate or even opposite meanings.
Promoting information integrity should be high
on our priority list.

The global debate on climate change is a good
example proving we can do this. The denying
of climate change and its evidence
by renowned scientific teams around the world
— quite common until recently — is in the face
of increasingly destructive climate conditions
and disasters now obscure even in the most
marginal opinion groups.

Vypracoval: Rastislav Mojto, OZP 6z1
i Podklad pre PSR | 79.VZ OSN By stupenie vo vSeobecnej rozprave | New York, 24. 9.2024

Our emissions are already beyond the
imaginary line of our Paris Commitments,
before which we could still significantly slow
down what we humanity have caused through
our activities. Blaming each other won't help
either. We'd better do what we can. Let's invest
part of our personal and political activity into
what is already happening with our climate.
Mitigating the consequences of hurricanes,
floods and extinguishing fires - both
figuratively and unfortunately also literally —-
is today's urgent climate agenda.

Protection of freedom, human rights and
human dignity for everyone, efforts to reduce
poverty, strengthening food _ security,
upgrading health, hygiene and vaccination
standards, environmental protection,
preservation of ecosystems and diversity.
Here - along with the climate change
mitigation — | see a huge area of action for the
UN and its specialized agencies too.

Practical and well-directed policies.
Coordination of different national
development and assistance programmes into
regional synergies and successes. As well
as comprehensive and expert evaluation
of green transition efforts.

Vypracoval: Rastislav Mojto, OZP 72M
i Podklad pre PSR | 79.VZ OSN By stupenie vo vSeobecnej rozprave | New York, 24. 9.2024

That is what | expect from the UN of today.

| am proud that Slovakia belongs — not only
in Europe but also globally — to the leaders
in compliance with joint climate commitments.

| believe the UN should also pay much more
attention to the technological and digital
aspects of our lives. Today, it's almost equally
important as our physical identities. What
| have in mind is no global regulation. That
is a task for regional actors. | rather think
of the widest possible involvement of new
technologies into everything that the UN has
been working on. My point is that the whole
world should more evenly benefit from
technological progress. It should become one
of the main engines of social progress and
a way to level differences and promote gender
equality. All of this is also a part of the basic
mission of the UN.

Another pressing problem in front of many
countries and the entire international
community is migration. It is a phenomenon
that divides us rather than unites us.
An agenda on which elections are won or lost
today.

Vypracoval: Rastislav Mojto, OZP 8z1
i Podklady pre PSR | 79.VZ OSN Ell vystupenie vo vSeobecnej rozprave | New York, 24. 9. 2024
However, we should never forget that most
of our ancestors across Europe were refugees
too — when they fled before war, poverty
or persecution during Nazism or communism.

There is no magic formula for addressing illegal
migration. It is - however — clear that many
aspects of migration need clear _ rules,
transparent procedures and effective policies.
Measures, which will help the source, transit
as well as target countries. It is also legitimate
to appropriately address all security risks that
the — in particular the illegal — migration brings.

But what we need in the first place is a calm,
pragmatic and realistic dialogue leading to the
cooperation of all concerned parties -— which
not only deals with the consequences but -
above all — with the causes of illegal migration
as well as those who aid it and profit from it.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Slovakia has long-term been an active member
of the UN. In the spirit of all the issues, priorities
and challenges that | mentioned today -
Slovakia is preparing as a_ candidate
for a non-permanent seat in the UN Security
Council in 2028 and 2029. Our diplomats
and experts are sitting in executive boards
of several specialized UN agencies.

Vypracoval: Rastislav Mojto, OZP 9zN

i Podklady pre PSR | 79.VZ OSN Ell wystipenie vo vSeobecnej rozprave | New York, 24. 9.2024

The roots of Czechoslovak — and today's Slovak
diplomacy -—- are. closely linked’ with
international cooperation. Names like Milan
Rastislav Stefanik, Stefan Osusky, Ivan Krno
or JGn Papdnek are well-known in the
diplomatic community and some of them left
a strong footprint here in the UN corridors too.

The latter one - Jan Papdnek - was
Czechoslovakia's delegate at the San
Francisco Conference and was one of the 14
people who formulated the _ final text
of the Charter that gave birth to this
organization. All these prominent Slovak
diplomats had one thing in common -— they all
were true and convinced multilateralists.

And it is to multilateralism that we — to a large
extent —- owe our modern statehood and
identity. It's therefore up to us — the leaders
of this world — to stress in communication
to our citizens that the building blocks and rules
of the international community —- which
we have been laying together for almost eight
decades since 1945 - have no sustainable
alternative.

It is our task to say and repeat that we must not
bring them down but — on the contrary — fix and
bolster them.

Vypracoval: Rastislav Mojto, OZP 10z11
i Podklady pre PSR | 79.VZ OSN Ell vystupenie vo vSeobecnej rozprave | New York, 24. 9. 2024
Multilateralism — just like the world around us —
is complex and has many - diverse and often
opposing -— layers. It requires a lot of patience
and it often brings frustration or bitterness.

However - it's also the most _ precious
generational wealth that we can relay to our
posterity. It's up to us in what condition and
how well or ill-prepared for the future we'll
jointly pass it on.

Thank you.

Vypracoval: Rastislav Mojto, OZP Nz
