STATEMENT BY

HIS EXCELLENCY DR. JULIUS MAADA BIO,

PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SIERRA LEONE

AT

THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 797 SESSION OF

THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY HIGH

LEVEL WEEK

ON

TUESDAY 2474 SEPTEMBER 2024

UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY HALL

MR. PRESIDENT,

1.1 congratulate Your Excellency Philemon
Yang on your election as President of the 791
Session of the United Nations General
Assembly and express Sierra Leone’s support
to you during your tenure.

2. | extend my deep gratitude to His
Excellency Dennis Francis for his principled
stewardship as President of the 78' Session
of the UN General Assembly.

| appreciate and thank His Excellency

Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of

the United Nations, for his tireless efforts

and global leadership.

2

MR. PRESDIENT,

4.

More than 30 years ago, Sierra Leone was

plunged into a decade-long brutal civil

WO.

More than fifty thousand people were
killed, and millions fled their homes as

refugees and internally displaced persons.

The situation in Sierra Leone at that time
was not unique. Conflicts existed in other
parts of West Africa, in Africa, and

around the World.

In Sierra Leone, however, we overcame
our challenges with a common vision for
peace through genuine dialogue,
committed leadership and action.

Notably, the hard-won peace we enjoy is
not without its fragility, and we remain

vigilant in safeguarding It.

Sierra Leone’s peace journey exemplifies

the values of ownership, engagement
through dialogue, and our partnership with
ECOWAS, the United Nations and the
broader International Community, which

yielded the peace dividend.

10. This story has shaped our engagement at
the UN Security Council since the
commencement of our second tenure in

January this year.

. Foralmost nine months, Sierra Leone, as an
elected Member of the UN Security

Council, has endeavoured to be a voice

of reason, and a_ bridge-builder with

balance and objectivity.

12. We will continue to promote respect for
and adherence to International Law and
the UN Charter, ensure the protection of
civilians, end impunity through
accountability, and foster dialogue for the

peaceful settlement of disputes.

. Our commitment to these principles is
even more imperative now than ever

before, as we are confronted with conflicts

of great magnitude in the Middle East,

Africa, Asia and Eastern Europe.

14. The need for a ceasefire in Gaza and the
wider Middle East, as well as in Sudan,
Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo,

and Ukraine, is not just pressing but urgent.

. Immediate action is required to prevent
further loss of precious lives and human

suffering.

. We need collective action to stop alll
conflicts and engage in meaningful

dialogue so that the countries can move

forward with their development agenda in

peace, security, and stability.

17. As a country that has experienced the

devastating consequences of armed

conflict, we acknowledge that peace

cannot be achieved in isolation; it requires
inclusive political processes, economic
development, and respect for human

rights.

. For the millions of civilians trapped in the
ongoing armed _ conflicts, words. of
condemnation and empathy alone are

not enough.

19. It is imperative that we act together as the
United Nations with a_— sustained
commitment to end the cycle of violence
and give innocent civilians the opportunity

to enjoy lasting peace and prosperity.

. In the Sahel and West Africa, the regional

leadership has been hard at work to find

urgent solutions to the numerous peace

and security challenges, particularly to
curb the spread of terrorism and violent

extremism.

21.

| call upon the International Community to
strengthen support for African-led peace
initiatives and for the United Nations to
play a more active role in addressing the

root causes of conflicts.

. Thesafety and security of the people in the

Sahel and parts of West Africa require a
strong commitment from all relevant
actors to engage in political dialogue
and diplomacy actively and to ensure we

provide countries in the frontline, Burkina

Faso, Mali and Niger, the necessary

support they need.

10

23. Commitment to political transitions Is

necessary, but not at the expense of the
safety of vulnerable citizens. There can be

commitment and action on both.

. [have called for meaningful dialogue and

led by example by visiting the Head of
State of Burkina Faso before Sierra Leone
assumed the Presidency of the UN Security

Council in August 2024.

. We need to build bridges, and this

requires the International Community's
commitment to working with the regions
to implement dialogue-based, region-led,

and region-owned solutions.

1]

MR. PRESIDENT,

26. Our current tenure at the UN Security
Council has reinforced the view that there
is an urgent need for reform. Nearly 80
years after its creation, the Security
Council has been stuck in time.

. Its imbalanced composition is unjust and
at odds with current realities, undermining
its legitimacy and effectiveness.
Unfortunately, Africa remains the

unquestionable victim. Without structural

change, the Security Council's effective

performance and _ legitimacy remain

questionable.

28.

In a historic and successful debate, which

| presided over during Sierra Leone’s

August Presidency of the Security Council

on addressing the historical injustice and
enhancing Africa’s effective
representation in the Security Council, |
spoke as a representative of a Continent
that has long been under-represented in
the decision-making processes that shape
our world on matters of peace and

security.

29. That debate had an_ undisputable

resonance — (1) that the _ historical
injustice being perpetrated against Africa
must be rectified, (2) that Africa must be
treated as a special case, and (3) that it

must be prioritised in the reform process.

. IN expressing appreciation for the active

and supportive engagement by the many

Interests and Regional Groups, as well as
invited Member States to the debate, the

facts and issues are now clear to alll.

32. Africa has long been marginalised in

global decision-making processes, and its

voices are often drowned out.

. The legacy of colonialism, economic
exploitation, and political marginalisation
has left deep scars on the African
Continent, affecting its development,
stability, and influence in_ international

affairs.

34. This results in a lack of meaningful

35.

representation on issues that directly
affect the Continent, such as conflict
prevention, conflict resolution,
peacekeeping operations, and

sustainable development.

Addressing contemporary global security
challenges requires the collective wisdom
and cooperation of all nations, not just the
privileged few or the most militarily or

economically powerful.

36. We argue that equitable representation of

Africa will better equip the United Nations
to tackle global challenges and foster a

more just, fair, and peaceful world.

. As the Coordinator of the African Union
Committee of Ten (C-10) on the Reform of
the Security Council, Sierra Leone remains
fully committed to promoting, defending
and soliciting support for the Common
African Position as espoused in the Ezulwini

Consensus and Sirte Declaration.

38. Africa, therefore, demands no less than
TWO PERMANENT SEATS WITH ALL THE

RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF _ THE

PERMANENT MEMBERS, including THE RIGHT

TO VETO and TWO ADDITIONAL SEATS IN
THE NON-PERMANENT CATEGORY of the

Security Council.

39. Sierra Leone welcomes the consensus that

has emerged from the UN General

Assembly Intergovernmental Negotiations

as reflected in the Pact for the Future, to
“Address the historical injustice against
Africa as a priority, and, while treating
Africa as a special case, improve the
representation of the underrepresented
and unrepresented regions and groups
. Let us work together to redress this
historical injustice and re-create a Security
Council that truly reflects the diversity of

the world.

41.

As | stated in the Security Council debate,
the time for half-measures and
incremental progress is over. AFRICA'S
VOICE MUST BE HEARD, AND ITS DEMANDS
FOR JUSTICE AND EQUITY MUST BE MET

NOW.

. PRESIDENT,

. The Summit of the Future for Sierra Leone is

about delivering peace, human rights and

the dividends of democracy for everyone,

everywhere, now.

43. Accordingly, my government has laid out
a strategic vision for Sierra Leone as
captured in the Sierra Leone’s Medium-
Term National Development Plan 2024-
2030 - a framework for delivering socio-
economic development and prosperity for

our people.

. Aligned to the Sustainable Development

Goals and African Union’s Agenda 2063,
our Development Plan serves as a
comprehensive blueprint for
transformative acceleration in critical
areas such as agriculture and food

security, human capital development,

21

job creation for our youths, infrastructure

development, and technology.

. With the adoption of the Pact for the
Future, including the Declaration on Future
Generations and the Global Digital
Compact at the Summit of The Future, my
Government is reinforcing its commitment
to championing and investing in Human

Capital Development.

. Human Capital Development is a profound

commitment to our people's well-being

and future.

47. By investing significantly in education,
healthcare and agriculture, my
government is laying the foundation for a

prosperous and equitable Sierra Leone.

. Over the past six years, our achievements
through our Free Quality Education

Programme, legislative reviews and

governance reforms in the education

sector and radical inclusion strategy have
been highly impactful, well-acclaimed

and seen as a good model for the world.

49. We welcome the Global _ Digital

Compact’s Principle of ensuring safe,
secure, and trustworthy emerging
technologies, including Artificial
Intelligence, to offer new opportunities to
accelerate development and leaving no

one behind.

. In the area of Gender Equality and

Women’s Economic Empowerment,
significant strides have been made, and
they are some of the legacies my
Government will bequeath to our current

and future generations.

24

$1.

| recently signed into law this year a Bill
Prohibiting Child Marriage, following the
historic signing into law the Gender
Equality and Women's Empowerment Act
2023, to ensure the realisation of the
national aspiration for our women and girls

to build an inclusive and equitable society.

. | remain steadfast in my commitment to

ensuring that every girl and woman lives in

a safe environment, with ample
opportunities to realise their full potential

and thrive equally in the World.

53. From prioritising the Women’s Peace and

Security Agenda at the Security Council to
the adoption by the General Assembly of
a Resolution Condemning All Forms of
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence and
urging all countries fo provide victims and
survivors with access fo justice, reparations

and assistance.

. We will continue to advocate for women

and girls across the globe.

55. Therefore, |am pleased to announce that

Sierra Leone will commence preparatory

work that will lead to the convening of a

diplomatic conference to conclude an
internationally legally binding instrument
on ‘Access to Justice for Sexual Violence
Survivors’ — the proposed Freetown Treaty -
in furtherance of the success of the United
Nation’s resolution on “Access to Justice,
Remedies and Assistance for Survivors of

Sexual Violence.”

MR. PRESIDENT,

56. Leaving no one behind and acting

together to achieve sustainable

development similarly means we have to
end global economic inequities and
ensure that Governments in least-
developed countries can _ deliver the
dividends of democracy.

. The unmanageable debt crisis, lack of
capital flows, the devastating impacts of
climate change and lack of climate
finance, conflicts, and political instability
around the world are increasing the odds
of developing countries not achieving the

SDGs.

58. The role of Development Finance

Institutions in supporting the objectives of
national development plans of low-
income countries, particularly those
emphasising the SDGs, is of great
significance to their socio-economic

development.

. At the — International Development

Association (IDA) for Africa Heads of State
Summit in Nairobi in April this year, Sierra
Leone unreservedly expressed its

endorsement of the “Nairobi IDA

Communiqué”.

60. The Communiqué exemplifies the

collective aspiration of the African Heads
of State present to raise the level of
development support in Africa through the
IDA21 Replenishment. | wish to re-echo

that endorsement at this August gathering.

. IDA’s affordable, concessional finance

allows Africa’s leaders to develop our
economies, enhance education and
healthcare, deal with the increasing
effects of climate change, and expand
electricity and digital access — without

becoming buried in unsustainable debt.

30

62. To conclude, Mr. President, the end of the
Second World War in 1945 did not only
unite leaders but also urged them to
cooperate. This was the birth of
multilateralism.

. As the African proverb says, “Our two
hands do not wash themselves; they wash
each other.”

. Asleaders, we must cooperate to achieve
the purposes of this United

Nations and deliver peace, — security,

stability, and prosperity for our people.

Divisions and unhealthy competition will

only lead to humanity's destruction.

3]

65. We must ensure unity in diversity, where the

rights of the weak and the minority are

protected.

. So, let Us safeguard our multilateral system.

. Let us cooperate, ‘acting together for the
advancement of peace, _ sustainable
development and human dignity for
present and future generations, Leaving no

one behind.’

THANK YOU!

