PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN TO THE UNITED
NATIONS NEW YORK

Statement of the Government of the Republic of South Sudan
at the 79 Session of the United Nations General Assembly
Thursday 26 September 2024
New York

Delivered by:
Hon. Ramadan Mohammed Abdallah Goc
Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation

Mr. President,

Mr. Secretary General,
Excellencies,
Distinguished delegates

Ladies and Gentlemen,

At the onset, allow me to extend warm greetings and congratulations on behalf of H.E. President
Salva Kiir Mayardit to your Excellency Philemon Yang, on your election as President of the 79%
session of the United Nations General Assembly. H.E. President Salva Kiir Mayardit would have
loved to be here but could not due to competing demands. The Republic of South Sudan stands
ready to support you during your tenure at the helm of the General Assembly.

Allow me to also warmly bid farewell to H.E. Ambassador Dennis Francis, the President of the
78" session of the General Assembly, for his stellar work in service of the ideals of the UN Charter.
We are especially grateful for his proactive leadership, as illustrated by the goodwill visit to South
Sudan in June this year, which he undertook in support of the ongoing efforts to consolidate peace,
security, and development in our country.

1|Page
Mr. President,

The theme of the 79" Session, “Leaving no one behind acting together for the advancement of
peace, sustainable development, and human dignity for present and future generations,” speaks
directly to the present state of global affairs. The ideals and values envisioned in the UN Charter
are as important, relevant, and crucial now as they were at the founding of this noble organization
on October 24'*, 1945. They remain essential to addressing serious global challenges, from
conflict, unrestrained nationalism, geopolitical competition, food insecurity, climatic shocks,
natural disasters, menacing pandemics, and threats to international peace and security.

Mr. President,

The Revitalized Government of National Unity, as repeatedly stated by H.E. President Salva Kiir
Mayardit, is fully committed to consolidating peace in our country. The implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan (R-
ARCSS) is the primary vehicle for ensuring peace and stability in our country.

Thus far, we have made tangible progress in our quest for durable peace and political stability in
the country, but we have been constrained by resource challenges to fully meet key benchmarks
of the agreement. Nonetheless, all the signatories to the peace accord remain steadfast in
consolidating the gains made so far in the form of relative stability and joining hands to complete
the rest of the outstanding elements. This unity of purpose was illustrated in the recent endorsement
by the cabinet, the Revitalized Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (R-JEMC), and the
Revitalized National Legislature of a 24-month extension of the transitional period, paving the
way for the organization of free and fair general elections in December 2026.

The decision to postpone the elections as previously scheduled was justified by the fact that
essential security sector mechanisms and elections-related institutions require more time to fulfill
their mandate. Mobilization of funds to complete these important tasks that are critical to the
conduct of free, fair, and credible elections in the Republic of South Sudan also demands more
time. Most importantly, the process of constitution-making covers a series of activities and requires
an adequate time frame for effective consultations with all stakeholders to ensure that a broadly
accepted constitution is adopted. We, therefore, call on the United Nations and the broader
International Community to join us in ensuring that this new roadmap for a peaceful transition in
South Sudan is met by availing the required financial and technical support for the process.

Furthermore, I am pleased to report that the Revitalized Government is currently engaged in robust
and promising negotiations with hold-out groups through the Tumaini Initiative under the auspices
of the Government of the Republic of Kenya to address all grievances and guarantee their return
to the country.

Mr. President,

Over the last year, the conflict in Sudan has created one of the worst humanitarian crises in the
world, as stated by the United Nations. As an immediate neighbor, we have been impacted by this
conflict, with about 800,000 refugees and returnees fleeing the war and settling in South Sudan.
While we profoundly appreciate the efforts of the UN and humanitarian agencies working to
alleviate the suffering of the victims of this conflict, we strongly encourage support for the IGAD
peace initiative to bring about peace to Sudan.

2|Page
Furthermore, we also believe that the international community’s support for the victims of the war
remains inadequate and unresponsive to the impact on the host communities that are also grappling
with serious humanitarian challenges. Therefore, we are calling on the international community to
expand their support and closely engage with the government of South Sudan to mitigate the
negative impacts of war on all victims.

Mr. President,

It is worth mentioning that the conflict in the Republic of Sudan has directly impacted the
economic situation in South Sudan, with oil production significantly reduced since April this year.
Given the fact that our economy is entirely reliant on revenue from the sale of our crude oil
transported through Port Sudan on the Red Sea, we urge the international community to double its
efforts toward resolving the conflict in Sudan. We further call for more solidarity with South Sudan
as it struggles to overcome and withstand the dire economic impacts created by the conflict in
Sudan.

Mr. President,

In the last 70 years, half a billion people in Africa alone have been affected by the impacts of
climate change. As a result, South Sudan battles and suffers from the devastating impacts of flood
and drought. Millions of people have been displaced, and many lives have been lost due to floods
and drought. Therefore, there is a need to scale up adaptation action and support to ensure an
adequate response in the context of the climate crisis. Moreover, we strongly urge developed
countries to exercise greater leadership by expanding their financial contribution to the required
global mitigation and adaptation interventions, as trillions of dollars are needed annually to tackle
the crisis and restore trust in the multilateral system.

Mr. President,

South Sudan recently conducted its first Voluntary National Review on the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), and the recommendations emerging from the findings are informing
our immediate interventions. Moreover, Our Revised National Development Strategy and annual
budgets are crafted around a commitment to the SDGs. Furthermore, the Ministry of Finance and
Planning and the National Bureau of Statistics, with support from UN agencies and development
partners, are working to strengthen the capacity of the National Statistical System to collect quality
and analyze timely and reliable data.

The Government is actively mobilizing resources to conduct the national population and housing
census, thus ensuring evidence-based planning and delivery of essential services. As South Sudan
capacitates its statistical system and bolsters its analytical capabilities, the Government is using
the multi-dimensional poverty index (MPI) measures to guide related policies, designing multi-
faceted interventions to improve the lives of the disadvantaged groups and track progress.

Mr. President,

In recognition of the role of women in public life, I am delighted to report that South Sudan is
making great strides in gender equality. The government of South Sudan believes that the active

3| Page
engagement of women in governance and decision-making is critical to ensuring the
implementation of the commitments contained in R-ARCISS, the Maputo Protocol, the National
Action Plan on United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325, and the SDG’s 2030 agenda and
African Union Agenda 2063. UNSCR 1325 is a particularly powerful advocacy tool for equal
representation in national governance.

As a reflection of our commitment to gender equity, South Sudan’s Transitional Constitution
enshrined a 35% affirmative action provision for women in all levels of governance. The peace
agreement also mandates the establishment of the Women Enterprise Fund, which shall serve as a
vehicle for availing resources that can leverage the entrepreneurial and innovative energies of our
dynamic female population. We strongly believe that all these initiatives align with the theme of
leaving no one behind.

Mr. President,

South Sudan is a young country in terms of its population, with young people constituting over
70% of the population. This demographic reality can be harnessed for a brighter future through
proactive and progressive investment in the youth. The Republic of South Sudan aims to develop
a robust education policy that is focused on unlocking this potential through job creation and
innovation and benchmarked under the provisions enshrined in the African Youth Charter and
United Nations resolutions on Youth-related empowerment.

The Ministry of Youth and Sports and our National Assembly are jointly working on legislation
for the National Youth Service and Youth Enterprise Development Fund. Once adopted, these two
laws shall create the necessary conditions for the empowerment of our youth. Therefore, we call
on the United Nations and the international community to augment our efforts to enhance the level
of technical and financial support to the government in the spirit of our common agenda and a
better future envisioned by the Pact for the Future agreed to at the recently concluded Summit of
the Future.

Mr. President,

South Sudan’s Universal Health Coverage service index is among the lowest in the region and
globally. This is attributed to the conflict, economic crises in the country, and consequences of
climate change, resulting in a fragile health system. Maternal and infant mortality rates remain the
worst in the world.

As such, the Government of The Republic of South Sudan commits to investing in affordable,
accessible, and standard-strengthened healthcare systems. We are committed to the optimal health
and well-being of our citizens via a primary healthcare approach as the most inclusive, equitable,
and cost-effective path to universal health coverage. Provision of Preventive health services
through national programs, such as Malaria, HIV/AIDS, TB (ATM) and routine immunization and
maternal and child health programs, including nutritional health services, is crucial for the
reduction of the economic burden of healthcare expenditures for households and the healthcare
system.

Pandemic preparedness and response through a multisector approach put us on a path to tackle
public health emergencies, such as responding to the current MPOX pandemic and other disease

4|Page
epidemics in the country. Most importantly, our commitment to address the burden of both
infectious disease and the rising burden of non-communicable diseases, as we aim at reducing
morbidity and mortality rates, remains our top priority.

Succeeding to achieve all the above will promote the Sustainable Development Goals of health
targets of 2030, which will enhance the strategies for the “Africa we Want” by 2063.

Mr. President,

As part of our commitment to transforming education, the government of South Sudan recognizes
every child’s right to quality education as well as addressing the issues of access, equity, and
inclusion. Based on this premise, the government’s commitment has been translated into several
actions or interventions. Primarily, His Excellency President Salva Kiir Mayardit reiterated the
government’s policy of universal basic education for all children regardless of their background
or gender in February 2023.

This has made a considerable impact not only in improving enrollment and retention in schools
but also in combating early and forced marriages that have often compelled many girls to drop out
of school. Consequently, we have achieved enrolment and retention of almost 3 million learners
at the primary education level, almost attaining gender parity.

Mr. President,

As you are aware, H.E. President Salva Kiir Mayardit, as the incumbent Chairperson of the East
African Community, has consistently emphasized the need for the maintenance of peace and
security in the East African region, the Great Lakes, and the Horn of Africa. The President’s efforts
align with the theme of this 79" session of the General Assembly and the Secretary General’s call
in the Summit of the Future.

Mr. President,

One of the main impediments to South Sudan’s full realization of sustainable peace and security
is the fact that the Security Council continues to maintain sanctions, individually targeted
sanctions, and the arms embargo despite our calls, the calls from the African Union, and IGAD to
lift it. These punitive measures have created a negative impact, restraining South Sudan’s full
potential by preventing the government from maintaining effective deterrence against negative
non-state actors that foment violence and insecurity.

Moreover, potential investors in various sectors believe that the country is under broad sanctions
and, as a result, refrain from investing in the country. As a country, we have experienced relative
peace and stability for the last six years, and the continued imposition of these punitive measures
is not reflective of the progress we have made so far.

Mr. President,

For any meaningful peace and security to prevail in the world, we urgently call for the reform of
the Security Council to be fit for purpose in today’s global dynamics and realities. The United
Nations has been an integral element in this effort, but it has to evolve in its processes and
structures to more optimally address contemporary problems. It is in this context that we join the
call for the expansion of the UN Security Council to incorporate the voice of Africans in an

5|Page
equitable way that reflects the continent’s weight and relevance in the maintenance of global order
and stability.

Therefore, I want to hereby state that South Sudan supports the Ezulwini Consensus (Africa’s
position) unequivocally as the most optimal way to restructure the Security Council. The reform
proposal announced recently, which grants Africa two permanent seats at the Security Council
without veto power, is counterproductive and falls short of the spirit of inclusive and equitable
global governance that we have been calling for.

This only exacerbates the current inequities and fails to achieve the illusive consensus and
cooperation required at the Security Council. South Sudan, therefore, calls for a text-based
negotiation, which is more viable and will lead to a Security Council with enhanced credibility
and acceptance.

Mr. President,
In conclusion, I wish to restate our appreciation for your leadership of this 79" Session of the UN
General Assembly, as well as express our commitment to the advancement of peace, sustainable

development, and human dignity for present and future generations.

I thank you.

6|Page
