Se
te ae
eee

Statement by

H.E. Bassam Sabbagh
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Expatriates

of the Syrian Arab Republic

Head of the Delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
to the General Debate

of the 79th Session of the United Nations General Assembly

September 30", 2024
Your Excellency Philémon Yang, President of the General Assembly,

I congratulate you on your election as president of the General Assembly at its current
session, and I thank your predecessor H.E. Dennis Francis for presiding over the
previous session. I also thank the Secretary General for the efforts exerted to fulfill his

mandate under the United Nations Charter.
Mr. President,
Ladies and gentlemen,

As this session of the General Assembly is taking place, tensions internationally have
reached a boiling point, and efforts to maintain international peace and security are
confronted with real challenges and threats: clashes are intensifying, crises are
multiplying, conflicts are escalating, chaos is spreading, terrorism is gaining ground,
the global economy is faltering, poverty rates are rising, climate change is
accelerating, and development indicators are lagging. These are the unfortunate
results of eight decades of multilateral action that have followed the establishment of

the United Nations.

While we previously sought to promote preventive diplomacy and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, we are witnessing today more direct wars and proxy wars
waged using terrorist tools. Instead of harnessing scientific advancements for the
benefit and wellbeing of all people, we are witnessing disgraceful use of modern
technologies as deadly tools to sow death and destruction. Instead of investing efforts
and resources in achieving sustainable development for all, some are flagrantly
draining the resources of other countries, stealing from their people, and imposing

unilateral coercive measures that impoverish and destroy nations.
Mr. President,

For more than a decade, Syria has experienced unparalleled suffering. It fell victim to
a fierce terrorist war, direct attacks on its territories that continue to this day, a
multifaceted and stifling economic blockade, and an unprecedented political and
media incitement campaign. Billions of dollars were spent to erode the development
progress that Syria had worked over decades to achieve. Billions more were spent to
spread chaos and undermine security and stability, and to force millions of Syrians to

leave their homes, only to become internally displaced or refugees in other countries.
Nevertheless — ladies and gentlemen — rest assured that, despite everything, we have
remained faithful to our strong beliefs, our firm positions, and to the choices we made
as a nation. Syria never hesitated to protect and defend its people and never faltered in
its war on terrorism. Economic hardships did not prevent us from meeting the needs
of our people. All that has happened has revealed the true intentions of the collective
West, which completely contradict the principles and purposes that formed the pillars

of foundation and funcntion of this international organization.
Mr. President,

The ongoing Israeli occupation of Arab territories since 1967, including the Syrian
Arab Golan, and the genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity it commits,
are a glaring example of the failure of this organization, and namely the Security
Council, to end this expansionist and racist occupation and the ongoing aggression. It
is damning proof that the United States has prevented the Council from fulfilling its

responsibility to confront threats to international peace and security.

Since October 7", the Israeli occupation has continued to commit bloody and terrorist
crimes, adding another chapter to its seven-decade-long criminal record. Over the past
months, the occupying forces and settler gangs have been carrying out a savage
aggression on the Palestinian people and committing a genocide before the eyes of the
whole world, which has claimed the lives of more than 42,000 Palestinians, most of

whom are children and women.

The Syrian Arab Republic strongly condemns the Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people and renew its solidarity with its legitimate struggle to liberate their
occupied land and establish their independent state on their entire national territory,
with Jerusalem as its capital, while ensuring the right of Palestinian refugees to return
to their homeland in line with international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions. Syria also condemns all attempts to liquidate UNRWA and suspend the
services it provides to Palestinians in their land and in neighboring countries. We
stress the need to hold Israel accountable for the war crimes it is committing,
including the deliberate targeting of more than 200 personnel working for UNRWA

and other UN and humanitarian agencies.

In an attempt to cover the failure of its war against the Palestinians and to flee of its

internal crisis implicate others in their internal crises and distract from their failed war

2
against the Palestinians, Israeli authorities have chosen to drag the region into a
serious escalation, while benefiting from the immunity, impunity, and unlimited
support provided by certain countries, in particular the United States, in a clear case of
hypocrisy and double standards. Israeli forces have scaled up their attacks on
countries of the region, including my country Syria, targeting vital civilian facilities,
residential buildings, and even diplomatic premises, resulting in the death of dozens
of civilians, significant material damage, and hindering the delivery humanitarian aid

to Syrians.

On 27 July 2024, Israeli occupying forces committed another heinous crime against
our people in the occupied Syrian Golan, when they targeted the Syrian town of
Majdal Shams claimed the lives of 12 Syrian children. The criminal Israeli forces
went even further, blaming others for this tragedy and exploiting the death of innocent

Syrians for propaganda purposes.

The open Israeli aggression has also extended to our brotherly Lebanon; two weeks
ago, the Israeli occupation authorities committed an unprecedented crime against the
Lebanese by using the means of communication as a tool to kill unarmed civilians. A
few days ago, the Israeli occupation authorities targeted the southern suburb of Beirut
with a treacherous and cowardly aggression, destroying an entire residential block,
using tons of explosive bombs to assassinate Hezbollah Secretary-General Sayyed
Hassan Nasrallah, who for more than three decades led an honorable Lebanese

national resistance against the Israeli occupation.

This large-scale Israeli aggression, which is unfettered by any restrictions and
limitations, is pushing the region to the brink of a dangerous escalation and
confrontation whose consequences cannot be predicted, and causing disastrous effects

on peace and security, not only in our region, but also beyond it.

The Syrian Arab Republic calls on all member states of the United Nations to work
towards ending the Israeli aggression against Palestine, Syria and Lebanon, hold the

occupation authorities accountable for their crimes, and prevent impunity.

The Syrian Arab Republic unequivocally reiterates that the Golan is an occupied
Syrian territory and that its inhabitants are Syrian Arab citizens, who are and will
always be an integral part of the people of Syria. They have struggled over decades

against the occupation and the unjust annexation, and the attempts to impose the

3
Zionist identity and all the flagrant and systematic violations at the hands of the brutal
occupier. They remain rooted in their land and firm in their beliefs. Their hearts beat
and their souls yearn only for Syria until the day they are reunited. Syria reaffirms that
recovering the occupied Syrian Golan, in line with UN resolutions 242, 338, and 497,
is an inalienable right that shall never be subject to compromise and will never be

affected by the passage of time.
Mr. President,

The crimes and attacks of the Israeli occupying forces against Syria cannot be
uncoupled from the subversive role played by certain Western countries, especially
the United States, in my country Syria. These countries have continued to violate
Syria’s sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity, by illegally deploying their
military forces inside Syria’s territory, allowing their officials to sneak into Syria, and

supporting separatist militias and terrorist groups.

These countries have also worked to exacerbate the humanitarian situation of the
Syrian people by depriving them of the benefit of their resources as a result of their
systematic looting of Syria’s national riches, such as oil, gas, and wheat, and by
imposing inhumane unilateral coercive measures whose disastrous effects have

affected all aspects of the daily lives of Syrians.

These measures targeted various vital sectors, most notably the public health sector,
which suffered from the inability to provide hospitals with medical equipment and
life-saving medicines, in addition to targeting the energy sector, which prevented the
provision of electricity, as well as the banking sector and trade exchanges. They also
targeted the transportation sector, civil aviation equipment and supplies, and the
agricultural sector was not spared from these measures, which prevented obtaining

agricultural production requirements, which led to a decline in food security rates.

All the unfounded allegations made by Western countries to justify such illegal
measures and to deny or downplay their catastrophic impacts have been laid bare in
multiple recent UN reports tackling effects of UCMs imposed on the Syrian Arab
Republic. In this context, Syria demands once again the immediate, full, and
unconditional lifting of unilateral coercive measures as they amount to a collective
punishment of people, a form of economic terrorism, and a flagrant violation of the

UN Charter and international law.
Mr. President,
Ladies and gentlemen,

Since the beginning of the terrorist war on Syria, the Syrian government has
responsibly and constructively engaged with all initiatives aimed at preserving Syria’s
sovereignty, unity, and territorial integrity, protecting its people from terrorists,
improving the living conditions of Syrians, and providing basic services. Many

measures have been taken to that end, which can be summed up in the following:

One: mobilizing all efforts to eradicate terrorist groups, such as ISIL and Al-Nusra
Front / Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, which are designated on the Security Council lists of
terrorist groups and associated entities. And to put an end to their dark thinking,
extremist ideology, and practices based on killing, torture, enforced disappearance,
restriction of freedoms, recruitment of children, discrimination, and violence against

women and girls.

The Syrian government continues to confront the remaining organizations to end the
suffering of Syrians in the areas which they still control, and to put an end to their
attacks on the safe people. In addition to calling on all countries to repatriate their
citizens currently detained in illegal centers in northeastern Syria to end and close

them due to the danger they pose to them in the future.

Two: pursuing national reconciliation and local settlement agreements, where 23
amnesty decrees have been issued, which facilitated the social reintegration of those
who had lost their way. The most recent of these was legislative decree number 27 of
22 September, which declares a general amnesty for crimes committed before its

issuance date.

Three: supporting and facilitating humanitarian access by granting the UN multiple
authorizations to use three border crossings to deliver humanitarian assistance to

eligible Syrian civilians in northwest Syria and by granting the necessary approvals
for humanitarian deliveries from inside Syria, despite all of the attempts to obstruct

humanitarian access and steal or divert the aid.

Four: Continuing the efforts of the Syrian state institutions to enhance their role and
increase their efficiency, by holding on time all constitutionally mandated

entitlements, and following up on the process of economic and administrative
development and reform; and moving forward with efforts to modernize legislative
structures, including those related to strengthening the rule of law, developing media
work, social protection programs and empowering women, protecting the rights of
children and persons with disabilities, implementing the strategic plan for gender
equality, and developing legislation regulating conscription, in addition to organizing
a series of comprehensive dialogues with representatives of various segments of

society and civil activities to establish the approach of dialogue and partnership.

Five: sparing no efforts to support the dignified return of refugees and displaced
people to their areas. An agreement was reached with the Office UNHCR on several
measures, which were announced last year and are currently being implemented.
Discussions are also ongoing with certain neighboring countries to launch innovative
projects that allow the provision of basic services, which could be a model to assist

facilitating and accelerating return.

Six: openly engaging with all the efforts and initiatives made at the political level,
including taking part in the Astana meetings, which have achieved concrete results.
The Syrian government is also in constant contact with the UN Special Envoy for
Syria and is cooperating with him in line with his mandated role as a facilitator of a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process. We look forward to his successful

convening of the ninth round of the constitution discussion committee soon.

Seven: committing to dialogue and diplomacy as a basis to a course for correcting
relations with other countries. The Syrian government has positively engaged with the
various initiatives put forward in this regard, in line with our firm belief that the
interests of countries must be built on sound relations based on specific principles and
clear grounds to achieve the desired objectives, in particular mutual respect for states’
sovereignty and territorial unity, joint action to address threats to security and

stability, and pursuing common interests without interfering in internal affairs.
Ladies and gentlemen,

As Syria heals the wounds of what it has been exposed to, it looks to the future with a
sense of hope and optimism. However, the success of its efforts necessarily requires
the collective West to stop politicizing humanitarian work and linking it to political
conditionality, donors to fulfill their pledges in humanitarian funding, and to provide

sustainable solutions for livelihoods and support for resilience, including by working

6
to strengthen early recovery projects and increase their quantity and quality, and the

immediate, complete and unconditional lifting of unilateral coercive measures.
Mr. President,

Syria reiterates its demand for a Middle East zone free of weapons of mass
destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, in line with the 1995 Middle East
resolution. Israel must therefore be compelled to eliminate its arsenal of weapons of
mass destruction, join relevant international treaties and conventions, and place its

installations under the international monitoring.

Syria expresses its support and solidarity with Arab countries, especially those facing
challenging circumstances resulting from foreign interference, natural events, or

climate change.

Syria reiterates its support to the right of the Russian Federation to defend itself and to
preserve its national security in response to the West’s hostile policies, and in
rejection of the logic of hegemony, and unipolarity. Syria also condemns the attempts

to confiscate Russian financial assets.

Syria expresses once again its full support to the Islamic Republic of Iran and its
legitimate right to defend its national security, as guaranteed by the UN Charter, and
its right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. We commend Iran’s constructive and

responsible approach in this regard.

Syria renews its support to the One China principle and the stances of the People’s
Republic of China as it faces external attempts to interfere in its internal affairs. We
stress China’s inalienable right to take the measures and steps it deems necessary to

defend its sovereignty and confront the escalation against it.

Syria condemns the decades-long United States’ economic embargo on Cuba, and
rejects the issuance of the infamous list called “The countries sponsoring terrorism”.
Syria calls for an end to the US military drills and exercises on the Korean peninsula,
as they contribute to raising tensions in that region. My country reiterates its solidarity
with Venezuela in the face of the flagrant interference in their internal affairs and the

hostile policies against them.
Syria calls for the immediate lifting of all unilateral coercive measures imposed by
Western countries on Russia, Iran, Venezuela, Belarus, Cuba, Nicaragua, the DPRK, ,
Eritrea, and others, as well as on Syria. We also underscore the need to stop all
attempts of interfering in these countries and to respect their sovereignty and

independent decisions.
Mr. President,
Ladies and gentlemen,

In conclusion, I would like to call on the countries of the world to summon the
courage and make the right choice to guarantee a better present and future for present
and future generations, and save humanity from the scourge of all-out wars looming
on the horizon, by supporting the establishment of a more just and balanced
multipolar global order, governed by the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter, and to reform international political and financial institutions to end
the state of hegemony and unipolarity, and deters attempts to undermine the Charter

and replace it with the so-called “rules-based order.”

The Syrian Arab Republic, while looking forward to the current session of the
General Assembly, under your leadership, to be able to fulfill the promise of its
theme: “Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace,
sustainable development and human dignity for present and future generations.”
stresses that success in translating this theme into a practical reality requires
abandoning the policies of hegemony, exclusion, blockade and collective punishment
of peoples, and adhering to the Charter of our organization, respecting international
law and multilateral diplomacy, and granting developing countries equal opportunities
to advance their societies and achieve well-being, prosperity and sustainable

development for their peoples.

Thank you, Mr. President.
