Statement by
His Excellency Mr. Maris Sangiampongsa
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Thailand
at the General Debate
of the 79" Session of the United Nations General
Assembly
28 September 2024, United Nations Headquarters, New

York
2k 2K ok 2k ok ok of of ok of of of 2K ok 2k 2K ok ok ok of of of of ok 2K ok 2k ok ok ok of of of of 2k 2K ok ok ok ok ok ok ok ok of ok ok ok

ok KK KK

Theme: Leaving no one behind: acting together for the
advancement of peace, sustainable development and human
dignity for present and future generations

Mr. President,
Excellencies,
Distinguished Delegates,

1. Allow me to begin by congratulating His Excellency
Mr. Philemon Yang on his election to preside over the
Seventy-Ninth session of the United Nations General Assembly.

2.1 am here today representing Thailand’s new government
led by Prime Minister Paetongtarn Shinawatra, to reiterate
Thailand’s determination to continue our people-centered,
economic-oriented policies to achieve stability and
sustainable development for our people.

Mr. President,
3.In an increasingly fragmented and complex world,

Thailand reaffirms our support for a _ rules-based
multilateral system with the United Nations at its core.
4. When the United Nations was founded seven decades
ago, we did not envision challenges from technological
disruptions, pandemics and climate crisis. In view of the
present realities, the United Nations must step up and
respond to the evolving challenges of our times to remain
relevant. It must be agile and adaptable to new and
emerging threats. And to ensure that the multilateral
system is fit for purpose, global governance and the
United Nations must undertake comprehensive reforms,
including that of the Security Council.

5. With this year’s Summit of the Future and General
Debate, Thailand looks to the United Nations we all need --
a United Nations with increased convening power to sustain
and strengthen international peace and security; a
United Nations that effectively addresses global challenges;
a United Nations that improves the lives, equality, and
dignity of people around the world; and a United Nations
that speaks for the aspirations and interests of all
nations, not just the most powerful.

Mr. President,

6. Thailand believes that in order for the United Nations to
truly sustain and strengthen international peace and
security, Member States must uphold their disarmament
and non-proliferation obligations to rebuild trust and ensure
a safe and secure world.
3.

7. Moreover, various flashpoints around the globe continue
to challenge the credibility of the United Nations to resolve
conflicts. We are deeply concerned about increasing armed
conflicts in Ukraine and different parts of the world, as well
as the escalating violence and worsening humanitarian
situation in Gaza. These situations have far-reaching
implications on any smaller nation. Therefore, it is
incumbent upon us to find peaceful solutions that respect
the United Nations Charter and human rights.

8. In our own neighborhood, Thailand faces challenges from
the situation in Myanmar. As Thailand shares the longest
land border with Myanmar, we are directly affected by the
spill-over effect of the situation in the country. We wish to
see a peaceful and prosperous Myanmar, which will also
bode well for peace and prosperity in the region at large. We
believe that a peaceful political solution in Myanmar must
be Myanmar-led and Myanmar-owned. That is why we
are engaging with all sides. And we will continue to work
closely with ASEAN and the international community to
facilitate dialogue among different parties to drive forward
the 5-Point Consensus.

9. As part of this effort, we are stepping up humanitarian
assistance to the people of Myanmar through various
channels, including the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for
Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management (AHA-
Centre) and relevant United Nations organizations. Thailand
will continue to support a peaceful and prosperous
Myanmar, not just because it is a pragmatic approach, but it
is the right way forward.
Mr. President,

10. Sustainable peace, security, and development are
closely linked.

11. And to secure a sustainable future, we must accelerate
attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
On Thailand’s part, we have been sharing our locally-
driven, people-centered development approach known as
the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy (SEP) to advance
implementation of the SDGs. The SEP for SDGs
Partnership is known widely as a best practice on SDGs
localization.

12. We are concerned with the slow pace in the
implementation of the SDGs goals at the global level, which
is only of 17% on track. We must ensure that countries have
adequate means and resources to achieve the SDGs,
especially through financing for development. The Fourth
International Conference on Financing for Development
(FfD4) next year provides a key opportunity to address the
large and growing SDG financing gap. In this regard,
Thailand reiterates the call for a reform of the
international financial architecture.

13. In addition to ensuring a just and inclusive financing
system, we must also strengthen trade, investment and
development cooperation, especially through South-South
and triangular cooperation. Thailand is committed to forging
stronger partnerships, particularly with Least Developed
Countries (LDCs), Landlocked Developing Countries
5.

(LLDCs), and Small Island Developing States (SIDS).
Moreover, Thailand’s aspiration to become a member of
BRICS and OECD is driven by our desire to build bridges
in promoting North-South development cooperation, which
is also critical in addressing urgent challenges, such as
climate change.

14. Indeed, Thailand is among the top ten countries most
affected by climate change. Earlier this month, Thailand and
many countries in Southeast Asia were faced with
destructive floods caused by Typhoon Yagi. We therefore
advocate a balanced and equal emphasis on both mitigation
and adaptation for climate action. To achieve concrete
results, we must scale up climate finance. Thailand looks
forward to the COP29 in Baku this November, where
Member States will commit to a New Collective Quantified
Goal (NCQG), grounded in the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities. At the same time, we hope to
see the full operationalization of the loss and damage fund
soon.

15. Climate disasters have taught us that failure to address
this matter will delay the achievement of the SDGs and have
widespread impact on human rights and human security. For
this reason, the implementation of the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction is crucial.
Mr. President,

16. The adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights was an achievement that met the highest aspirations
of the people. And today, amid rising inequalities and
vulnerabilities, Thailand believes that the United Nations
must remain the bedrock of fundamental truths enshrined in
the Declaration -- to protect the lives and ensure the
equality and dignity for all.

17. For Thailand, protecting and promoting human rights
for all does not only mean guaranteeing basic human
dignity, but it also aims at providing opportunities to
advance social justice and equality. With our long-
standing policy to protect all persons and groups, especially
the most vulnerable, we have made concrete progress in
ensuring equal rights for all those living in Thailand,
regardless of their origin, belief, sex or gender.

18. Based on this commitment, Thailand is presenting our
candidature to the Human Rights Council for the term
2025-2027. At the Council, we will serve as a bridge builder
to connect different perspectives and work with all
stakeholders. We will ensure that all countries are equipped
and supported in their human rights actions through
experience sharing and technical cooperation.

19. Moreover, we will also continue to push for the
creation of a safe and secure society for all. Recently, we
adopted the Marriage Equality Act. On health, we will
continue to advance the right to health by advocating for
_7-

Universal Health Coverage and the conclusion of a
Pandemic Treaty as well as steer forward the Foreign
Policy and Global Health agenda, which Thailand serves
as Chair this year. On crime prevention, we will work
closely with all partners to combat increasing drug
trafficking and transnational crimes in the region and
beyond, especially those enabled by digital technology and
underground economies.

Mr. President,

20. Thailand welcomes the successful conclusion of the
Summit of the Future. In the next step, we have to work
together to make the Pact for the Future “high on impact
and high on action” by translating the Pact into tangible
outcomes.

21. And to realize this, I outlined Thailand’s vision to
achieve this future through what I called -- the “4 Ps.”
Whether it be building a future where all are protected,
where all can prosper, and which is promising for all -- it
is essential that we give our collective political will.

22. This means harnessing our political will to promote the
power of technologies to help accelerate the SDGs and
taking steps to close the digital divide among countries
through the Global Digital Compact (GDC). We support
technology cross-flows and transfers, capacity-building, as
well as digital literacy development to enhance the ability of
countries to promote people-centered and _ planet-centric
development.
23. This also means giving importance to the Declaration
on Future Generations, for our actions or inactions of
today will determine a future for them. Everywhere, youth
and future generations deserve to have big dreams, and even
bigger doors of opportunities.

Mr. President,

24. Seventy-eight years ago, Thailand looked toward the
United Nations as a guarantor of a more peaceful and
prosperous future. And at present, Thailand carries onwards
the same belief of a United Nations that is a pioneer of a
prevailing peace and drives our peacekeepers and aid
workers to serve in remote regions of the globe. And in this
very same spirit, Thailand pledges to continue to serve as a
bridge-builder, fostering dialogue and trust among
nations.

25. We may be nations with different and diverse cultures
and traditions, but we are united by our common humanity
and aspiration for the future we want. And for that, we must
together build the United Nations we need.

26. I thank you, Mr. President.

Fis FIs 28 2k 2k 2k 2k 2k 2s 28s 2s 28 oI 2 2K 2K

(1575 words, approximately 15 minutes)
