STATEMENT
by the Deputy Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Turkmenistan
R.O. Meredov
at the Plenary meeting of the 79th session
of the United Nations General Assembly
(September 27, 2024, New York)
Your Excellency,
Mr. President of the General Assembly
Distinguished heads and members of delegations,

First of all, allow me to congratulate you on the
beginning of the 79th session of the United Nations
General Assembly.

I congratulate Mr. Philemon Yang on his election as
the President of the General Assembly and wish him
every success.

I would also like to express my gratitude to
Ambassador Dennis Francis for his effective leadership
of the General Assembly during the 78th session.

Ladies and gentlemen,

Strategic partnership with the United Nations and
cooperation with member states are the main principle of
Turkmenistan in addressing the pressing global issues
and challenges.

The key condition and major criterion in this work
for Turkmenistan is adherence to the UN Charter,
international legal norms, and recognized, beneficial
models of relations based on equality, sovereignty and
mutual respect among all participants in international
affairs.

In this logic, Turkmenistan supports the global
mission of the United Nations as a conductor of the
collective mandate and the balance of interests of
member states.
This position was reaffirmed at the meetings of the
UN _ Secretary-General with the President of
Turkmenistan and the National Leader of the Turkmen
people during his visit to Turkmenistan this summer.

For the 79th session, Turkmenistan has decided to
follow four priorities, which are:

peace and security;

- sustainable development;
- climate change;

- humanitarian issues.

All of these areas are closely interconnected. It
means, that their implementation must be
comprehensive, based on unified principles and
approaches.

In this céntext, Turkmenistan advocates for equal,
fair, and balanced approach that would ensure the UN
pays same attention to all key areas of the international
agenda.

In matters of ensuring peace and _ security,
Turkmenistan’s efforts at the current session will be
aimed at strengthening peace and trust, enhancing the
role of preventive diplomacy mechanisms, and furthering
peacebuilding processes in line with the “New Agenda
for Peace.”
When it comes to Global security, Turkmenistan
especially promoting model of neutrality within the UN,
which capable to provide the world community with
practical tools to resolve existing and prevent potential
conflicts and contradictions.

Next year we will celebrate 30th anniversary of the
UN General Assembly resolution on international
recognition of neutral status of Turkmenistan.

Over the past years, our neutrality has demonstrated
its alignment with the high ideals, basic principles and
goals of the United Nations. The unanimous adoption in
2015 of the corresponding resolution of the General
Assembly has demonstrated that neutrality became a
heritage of the entire world community.

During the 79th session, our country will be
promoting further support of the political and legal
foundations of neutrality and their application across a
broad range of UN activities.

Preventive diplomacy holds an important place here.

We are convinced that the time has come to reflect
on the significance of neutrality for global politics and its
potential in the current strategic landscape.

In this regard, Turkmenistan puts forward the
initiative to provide neutral countries the status of
priority partnership with the UN in its peacekeeping
efforts. We are confident that this will serve as an
effective impetus for the international community to
more actively utilize the tools of neutrality and
preventive diplomacy.
One of the essential aspects of the UN's security
agenda - is the practical implementation of the General
Assembly Resolution declaring 2025 as __ the
“International Year of Peace and Trust.”

Naturally, as the country that initiated the
Resolution, Turkmenistan will take on the leading role in
organizing relevant events next year. At the same time,
we rely on the support of all member states, the UN
Secretariat, and its leadership to ensure that the
“International Year of Peace and Trust” becomes a
manifestation of the goodwill of the international
community, its desire for peace and harmony,
overcoming differences, conflicts and rejection of
dividing lines.

In the regional dimension, the most important aspect
of ensuring security is cooperation in the Afghan
direction and support for the people of Afghanistan in
their aspirations to begin peaceful, constructive work to
rebuild the economy and social sphere and solve
humanitarian problems.

In this context, I would like to highlight major
infrastructure projects in Afghanistan being implemented
by our country together with international partners.
Among them is the construction of the strategic
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline.
Just two weeks ago, we began a new stage of construction
of the pipeline on Afghan territory.
Other significant projects include the construction of
power transmission and fiber-optic communication lines
along the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan route,
as well as a new railway from Turkmenistan towards
Afghan direction.

Turkmenistan’s humanitarian aid to the Afghan
people will continue, including the free construction of
social facilities there and the education of Afghan
students in our country’s educational institutions. Thus,
Turkmenistan in practice confirms its strong position of
solidarity with the people of Afghanistan.

In addressing the global climate agenda,
Turkmenistan will be focusing on protection of the
environment in Central Asia and Caspian Sea region.

In this regard, our country advocates for more active
and extensive UN involvement in saving the Aral Sea.

Turkmenistan initiated the adoption of two recent
UN General Assembly Resolutions on cooperation
between the UN and the International Fund for Saving
the Aral Sea. Furthermore in 2023, ESCAP adopted a
Resolution on the modalities for creating UN Special
Program for the Aral Sea Basin.

Among other specific problems of Central Asia,
which have much broader consequences and impact, we
highlight desertification and the reduction of water
resources. All of this requires more active cooperation
with the UN and présence of its resident offices in the
region on a permanent basis.
Turkmenistan is ready to work on this.

As a concrete step, in cooperation with the UN, our
country is promoting the establishment of specialized
structure — the Regional Center for Climate-Related
Technologies.

Another topic has gone far beyond regional borders
is the Caspian issue. In this regard, we especially
emphasize that preserving the Caspian Sea as unique
natural complex - are not just the internal affairs of the
littoral states, but a global-scale problem and challenge.
The approaches to solving them should be appropriate.

Therefore, Turkmenistan appeals to the UN, its
relevant agencies, such as UNEP and UNDP, financial
institutions, environmental funds, primarily Global
Environmental Facility, Green Climate Fund and other
structures, urging them to move towards systematic and
targeted cooperation with the Caspian states to combat
the sea's shallowing, destruction of its ecological balance,
reduction of bio-diversity, and other ecological and
climate issues affecting the Caspian Sea.

The President of Turkmenistan at the last session of
the UN General Assembly proposed the Caspian
Environmental Initiative. We are ready to start the active
dialogue on this topic and hope for the full support of the
General Assembly.
In matters of Sustainable Development, we propose
moving forward with a number of specific initiatives
from Turkmenistan.

In particular, we are talking about developing a
Global Framework Program for the transition to a
circular economy.

Other initiatives include the creation of a

- Global Atlas of Sustainable Transport
Connectivity;

- and Alliance for Global Energy Security and
Sustainable Development.

In cooperation with the UN we are ready to begin
developing algorithms for joint work on these proposals.

Turkmenistan will continue to work with the UN to
overcome the consequences of humanitarian crises,
address population issues, protect motherhood and
children, and safeguard the rights of persons with
disabilities ,refugees, and stateless persons, among other
topics.

I would like to note that our country has done
significant work in reducing and _ preventing
statelessness. Currently more than 32 thousand people,
including refugees and stateless persons, have been
granted Turkmen citizenship. It is mean, that this year,
we have fulfilled five-year National Action Plan to
eliminate statelessness.
Ladies and gentlemen,

Next year, the entire world will celebrate the 80th
anniversary of the United Nations.

We are approaching a milestone where
responsibility, foresight, and realism must guide all our
thoughts and actions. It is time to reflect on the path
traveled, assess the experience, correct mistakes and
shortcomings, and together move forward in improving
the work of our Organization and its institutions.

One thing must remain unshakable — it is
commitment to the values, principles and goals of the
UN, because they have proven their viability and
alignment with the fundamental long-term interests of
humanity. Around this fact, now more than ever, it is
necessary to combine all responsible forces.

Turkmenistan believes in the UN and its huge
creative potential. For our country, the United Nations
has always been and remains the unique international
organization with universal legal status.

The voice of the United Nations must remain strong
in ensuring global peace and security, sustainable
development, and solving humanitarian problems.

Turkmenistan will continue to contribute its efforts
in addressing the global challenges for the future of the
world through realization of its priorities.

Thank you for your attention.
