9/24/24, 4:23 PM Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey : “Not only children are dying in Gaza; the United Nations system is also dying”

“Not only children are dying in Gaza; the United
Nations system is also dying”

24.09.2024

Addressing the 79th session of the United Nations General Assembly, President Erdogan said: “Not
only children are dying in Gaza; the United Nations system is also dying, the truth is dying, the
values that the west claims to defend are dying, the hopes of humanity to live in a fairer world are
dying one by one.

President Recep Tayyip Erdogan addressed the 79" session of the United Nations General Assembly in
New York.

Beginning his speech by greeting the assembly, President Erdogan said: “I greet you with my most
heartfelt feelings and respect on behalf of myself, my country and my nation. I am very pleased to have the
opportunity to address the United Nations General Assembly once again today. I wish the 79th General
Assembly to be beneficial to our countries and to all humanity. I would like to congratulate Mr. Dennis
Francis, who has completed his Presidency of the General Assembly, and I wish success to Mr. Philemon
Yang, who assumed this duty.

“STATES THAT HAVE NOT RECOGNIZED THE STATE OF PALESTINE MUST TAKE THEIR
PLACE ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF HISTORY AT THIS VERY CRITICAL PERIOD”

“T would like to express our pleasure in seeing the Representative of the friendly and brotherly Palestine in
the place he deserves among the member states, after lengthy struggles. I wish this historic step to be the
last stage on the way to Palestine's membership in the United Nations. I also invite other states, that have
not yet done so, to recognize the State of Palestine as soon as possible and take their place on the right side
of history at this very critical period,” President Erdogan said.

https://www.tccb.gov.tr/en/news/542/153688/-not-only-children-are-dying-in-gaza-the-united-nations-system-is-also-dying-

1/7
9/24/24, 4:23 PM Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey : “Not only children are dying in Gaza; the United Nations system is also dying”

“We are living through and trying to manage the crises minute by minute that most of my friends here
watch on TV screens. Therefore, I am addressing you today as the leader of a country that is not far from
the tensions, but right in their epicentre. Even if some feel uncomfortable, even if some will once again
criticize us, I wish to speak out certain truths openly today, in the name of humanity, from the common
rostrum of humanity,” President Erdogan said.

“WE NEED THE VALUES REPRESENTED BY THE MAXIM ‘THE WORLD IS BIGGER
THAN FIVE’, MORE AND MORE NOWADAYS”

Recalling that the United Nations was established to maintain international peace and security after the
Second World War, during which millions of people lost their lives, President Erdogan said: ““With the
establishment of the United Nations, expectations for global stability, peace and justice blossomed again,
and hopes for peace revived. However, we observe with regret that in recent years, the United Nations is
struggling to fulfill its founding mission and is gradually turning into a dysfunctional, unwieldy and inert
structure. We need the values represented by the maxim “The world is bigger than five’, more and more
nowadays.”

“We witness that international peace and security are too important to be left to the arbitrariness of the
‘privileged five’,” President Erdogan underlined. “The most dramatic example of this is the massacre that
has been going on in Gaza for 353 days. More than 41 thousand Palestinians have lost their lives in the
ongoing Israeli attacks since October 7.”

“BY TEARING DOWN THE CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS AT THE UNITED
NATIONS ROSTRUM, THEY SHAMELESSLY CHALLENGED THE WHOLE WORLD”

“41 thousand people, 41 thousand lives brutally taken away, most of whom are children and women.
Similarly, the whereabouts of more than 10 thousand Gazans, most of whom are children, is unknown. In
the same way, about 100 thousand people have been injured and become disabled. 172 journalists have
been killed while trying to do their job under difficult conditions. More than 500 paramedics working to
save lives have been killed. Humanitarian aid workers and more than 210 United Nations personnel, who
rushed to the rescue of the people of Gaza struggling with hunger and thirst, have been killed. They hit 820
mosques and 3 churches that should be protected even at war. They hit tens of hospitals, hundreds of
schools, and more than 130 ambulances carrying patients. By tearing down the Charter of the United
Nations at the United Nations rostrum, they shamelessly challenged the whole world, all the conscientious
people right from here, from this rostrum,” President Erdogan said.

Noting that the leaked images from the prisons that Israel has turned into “concentration camps” indicate
very clearly what kind of persecution we are facing,” President Erdogan said: “As a result of the Israeli
attacks, Gaza has become the largest cemetery for children and women in the world. More than 17
thousand children have been the targets of Israeli bullets and bombs. Hind Rajab was only 6 years old.
Their vehicle was hit by Israeli forces while she was searching for a safe place with her relatives. Her
uncle, aunt-in-law, and cousins all died, only she survived. For 12 days she waited desperately to be
rescued. She waited for a helping hand to reach out to her for 12 days, saying, ‘Will you come to pick me
up? I am scared!’ Despite the level of development which our world has reached, despite the technology at
our disposal; despite our organisations with huge budgets employing thousands of personnel under their
roofs, unfortunately, as humanity of 8 billion, we have not been able to save a 6-year-old girl, an injured
sparrow fluttering in front of our eyes.”

“Hundreds of Gazan children have died so far because they were not able to find a bite of dry bread, a sip
of water or a bowl of soup, and they are still dying,” President Erdogan said. “Not only children are dying
in Gaza; the United Nations system is also dying, the truth is dying, the values that the west claims to
defend are dying, the hopes of humanity to live in a fairer world are dying one by one.”

“WHAT MORE ARE YOU WAITING FOR TO STOP THE MASSACRE NETWORK THAT
DRAGS THE ENTIRE REGION INTO WAR”

“T am asking you frankly from here. Human rights organisations! Are the ones in Gaza, the ones in the
West Bank not human beings? The children in Palestine, do they not have the right to study, live, and play
in the streets? International press organisations! The journalists that Israel massacred on live TV, whose
offices were raided, are they not your colleagues? The united nations security council! What are you
waiting for to prevent the genocide in Gaza and to say ‘stop’ to this cruelty, this barbarism? What more are
you waiting for to stop the massacre network that endangers also the lives of its own citizens along with the
Palestinian people and drags the entire region into war for the sake of its political prospects? And those
who unconditionally support Israel! For how long will you continue to bear the shame of looking on this
massacre, of being its accomplices?” President Erdogan said.

“THE RIGHTFUL RESISTANCE OF THE PALESTINIAN PEOPLE IS HEROIC”

“While children are dying in Gaza, Ramallah, Lebanon, and babies are dying in incubators, unfortunately,
the international community has also given a very bad account of itself, President Erdogan underscored.

https://www.tccb.gov.tr/en/news/542/153688/-not-only-children-are-dying-in-gaza-the-united-nations-system-is-also-dying-

2/7
9/24/24, 4:23 PM Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey : “Not only children are dying in Gaza; the United Nations system is also dying”

“What is happening in Palestine is an indicator of a huge moral breakdown. I believe that all the peoples of
the world, leaders, international organisations should reflect on this painful picture. I also want to hereby
express a truth loud and clear. Ignoring basic human rights, the Israeli government, is practicing ethnic
cleansing, an overt genocide against a nation, a people, and occupying their territory step by step.
Palestinians, whose freedom, independence and the most basic rights have been usurped, are very rightly
exercising their ‘legitimate right of resistance’ against this occupation and these ethnic cleansing activities.
The rightful resistance of the Palestinian people against those who occupy their land is too noble,
honourable, heroic to be portrayed as illegitimate.”

“THE ONLY REASON FOR ISRAEL'S AGGRESSION AGAINST THE PALESTINIAN PEOPLE
IS THE UNCONDITIONAL SUPPORT OF A HANDFUL OF COUNTRIES TO ISRAEL”

Wholeheartedly saluting once again his Palestinian brothers who defend their country at the cost of their
lives, President Erdogan said: “The only reason for Israel's aggression against the Palestinian people is the
unconditional support of a handful of countries to Israel. The countries that have an influence over Israel
are openly becoming accomplices of this massacre with the policy of ‘run with the hare, hunt with the
hounds’. Those who are supposedly working for a ceasefire in the limelight continue to send weapons and
ammunition to Israel behind the stage, so that it can continue its massacres. This is inconsistency and
insincerity.”

Noting that there's a document that has been going back and forth since May, President Erdogan said:
“Hamas has repeatedly declared its acceptance of the ceasefire proposal. However, the Israeli government
has very clearly indicated that it is the party that does not want peace by continuously hampering the
process, constantly finding excuses, perfidiously killing the interlocutor it negotiated with at a time when
the ceasefire was closest.”

Underlining that there should be no more credit given to Israel's distraction and deception moves, President
Erdogan said: “In an environment where United Nations Security Council Resolution 2735 is not being
implemented, coercive measures against Israel should be put on the agenda. Israel's attitude has once again
shown that it is essential for the international community to develop a protection mechanism for Palestinian
civilians. Just as Hitler was stopped by the alliance of humanity 70 years ago, Netanyahu and his murder
network must be stopped by the ‘alliance of humanity’. We believe that the power of the General Assembly
to make recommendations on the use of force, as it exists in the ‘Uniting for Peace Resolution dated 1950’,
should definitely be considered in this process. An immediate and permanent ceasefire should be achieved,
a hostage-prisoner exchange should be carried out, and humanitarian aid should be delivered to Gaza in an
unhindered and uninterrupted way.”

“TURKIYE IS THE COUNTRY THAT SENDS THE HIGHEST AMOUNT OF AID TO GAZA”

“We have to extend a helping hand to the people of Gaza trying to survive, especially before winter when
conditions will deteriorate,” President Erdogan said. “70 percent of the water resources and 75 percent of
the ovens in Gaza have been destroyed until now. 95 percent of health centres have been partially or
completely damaged. 150 thousand houses were completely destroyed, 200 thousand houses were partially
destroyed, 80 thousand houses became uninhabitable. Infectious diseases, especially polio and hepatitis,
are gradually increasing. The people of Gaza can only reach a quarter of the amount of aid they need. As
Tiirkiye, we have maintained and are continuing to maintain our humanitarian aid activities for our
Palestinian brothers since the first day. With the amount of aid exceeding 60 thousand tons, Tiirkiye is the
country that sends the highest amount of aid to Gaza. In the same way, by stopping commercial
transactions with Israel, we have demonstrated our sensitivity on this issue. We also stand with the people
and government of Lebanon, where Israel has stepped up its attacks in recent days.”

“FOUNDATION OF AN INDEPENDENT, SOVEREIGN AND GEOGRAPHICALLY
CONTIGUOUS PALESTINIAN STATE ON THE BASIS OF THE 1967 BORDERS, WITH EAST
JERUSALEM AS ITS CAPITAL CAN NO LONGER BE DELAYED”

Underscoring that our conscience cannot be at peace until those who massacred 41 thousand people are
held accountable for the crimes they committed, from the person who gives the order to the ones who pull
the trigger, and drop the bomb, President Erdogan said: “The bill for the billions of dollars of damage at the
destroyed, wiped out, demolished cities must and will definitely be compensated by the perpetrators. We
support the lawsuit filed by the Republic of South Africa at the International Court of Justice to ensure that
the crimes committed by Israel do not go unpunished. We will take all necessary steps to ensure that justice
is served in this case in which we have applied for intervention. We will make every legal struggle to find
justice for our daughter Aysenur Ezgi Eygi, who was shot in the head by Israeli soldiers during a peaceful
protest in Nablus. Although there is an urgent need for a ceasefire in Gaza, the main issue is the occupation
of Palestinian territories by Israel. Foundation of an independent, sovereign and geographically contiguous
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital can no longer be
delayed.”

“WE ARE A NATION THAT HAS ALWAYS BEEN ON THE SIDE OF THE OPPRESSED AND
STOOD AGAINST OPPRESSOR AND TYRANNY THROUGHOUT HISTORY”

https://www.tccb.gov.tr/en/news/542/153688/-not-only-children-are-dying-in-gaza-the-united-nations-system-is-also-dying-

3/7
9/24/24, 4:23 PM Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey : “Not only children are dying in Gaza; the United Nations system is also dying”

“T would like it to be known that we are also closely following the increasing attacks against our first Qibla,
Al-Masjid al-Aqsa and Al-Haram AlI-Sharif. While saying all this as Tayyip Erdogan, I never speak with
empty words from this rostrum. Here, I am speaking with the courage that I get from my history and the
conscientious and fair stance of my ancestors. Because we are a nation that has always been on the side of
the oppressed and stood against oppressor and tyranny throughout history. We had welcomed the Jews who
escaped from the inquisition 500 years ago and the Jews who escaped from Hitler's concentration camps. I
tell it frankly; as a country and as a nation, we have no hostility towards the people of Israel. We are against
anti-Semitism in the same way that we are against the targeting of Muslims just because of their beliefs.
Our problem is with the policies of massacre of the Israeli government. Our problem is again with the
oppressor and tyranny, just as it was 5 centuries ago. Everyone should know that we do not refrain from
crying out the truth. Even if some feel uncomfortable, we are not afraid to tell the truth. Insha’Allah, we
will continue to stand by the righteous until the end and speak of what we know as truth, even if it is
harsh,” President Erdogan said.

“IN THE 14TH YEAR OF THE CONFLICT, SYRIA IS ALSO STILL FAR FROM STABILITY”

Thanking all the brave people who show solidarity with the Palestinian people without distinction of faith,
country, language or religion, and raise their voice against the massacre in Gaza by filling the streets almost
every week, President Erdogan said: “Unfortunately, in the 14th year of the conflict, Syria is also still far
from stability. The economic and humanitarian situation in the country, which is in the grip of terrorist and
separatist organizations remains dire. We hope that the political process will be advanced and national
reconciliation will be achieved on the basis of United Nations Security Council Resolution 2254. We are
determined to maintain our position in favour of a realistic dialogue with sincerity.”

“WHILE IRAQ CONTINUES ITS STRUGGLE AGAINST TERRORISM, IT IS TAKING
DECISIVE STEPS TOWARDS DEVELOPMENT, RECONSTRUCTION AND
REINTEGRATION WITH THE REGION”

“While our neighbour Iraq continues its struggle against terrorism, it is taking decisive steps towards
development, reconstruction and reintegration with the region. The international community should
support these efforts of Iraq. It is important in this context to implement initiatives that will benefit the
entire region, such as the Development Road Project. The success of all these efforts depends on the
elimination of the terrorist threat in Iraq, especially from the PKK. We believe that taking steps towards
reviving the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action with our other neighbour Iran will contribute to the
establishment of the environment of trust and stability in the region,” President Erdogan said.

“WE WILL CONTINUE TO METICULOUSLY IMPLEMENT THE MONTREUX
CONVENTION”

“As the third year of the war in Ukraine comes to an end, we are still far from reaching a just and lasting
peace. As the armament race accelerates, the field of diplomacy is gradually narrowing. We will further
increase our support to the efforts to end the war through diplomacy and dialogue, on the basis of Ukraine's
territorial integrity and sovereignty. In this process, we will continue to meticulously implement the
Montreux Convention,” President Erdogan said.

Noting that Tiirkiye supports the peace process between Azerbaijan and Armenia, President Erdogan said:
“We hope that the work will be completed with good news as soon as possible. We are also taking mutually
positive steps on the Tiirkiye-Armenia track. The developments that can be achieved in the Azerbaijan-
Armenia peace process will also have a positive impact on the Tiirkiye-Armenia normalization process.”

“WE WANT TO SEE THE AEGEAN SEA AND THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN AS A
REGION OF STABILITY AND PROSPERITY WHERE THE LEGITIMATE INTERESTS OF
ALL PARTIES CONCERNED ARE RESPECTED”

“We play a constructive role for the prosperity and peace of the Balkans, of which we are an integral part,
and act in close cooperation with all actors in the region. As a member of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, we emphasize the importance of Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty, political
unity and territorial integrity on every platform, and we continue to contribute to the EUFOR-ALTHEA
Operation. We successfully continue the KFOR command that we assumed last year and support the
Belgrade-Prishtina Dialogue process. We want to see the Aegean Sea and the Eastern Mediterranean as a
region of stability and prosperity where the legitimate interests of all parties concerned are respected.
Delimitation of maritime jurisdiction areas in accordance with international law, freedom and safety of
navigation, and the development of cooperation, especially on maritime trade issues, are to the common
interest of the entire region,” President Erdogan said. “‘Tiirkiye is ready for constructive cooperation on all
issues, especially energy and environment. We expect the same approach from our neighbours.”

“I CALL ON THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY TO RECOGNIZE THE TURKISH
REPUBLIC OF NORTHERN CYPRUS AND ESTABLISH WITH IT DIPLOMATIC,
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC RELATIONS”

https://www.tccb.gov.tr/en/news/542/153688/-not-only-children-are-dying-in-gaza-the-united-nations-system-is-also-dying-

AI7
9/24/24, 4:23 PM Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey : “Not only children are dying in Gaza; the United Nations system is also dying”

“As the country with the longest coastline in the Eastern Mediterranean, Tiirkiye's key role is undeniable,”
President Erdogan underscored. “Tiirkiye has rights to the north and west of the Island of Cyprus in the
declared continental shelf and Turkish Cypriots have rights all around the Island. It has been 50 years since
the Cyprus Peace Operation and 61 years since the Cyprus issue emerged as a result of the usurpation of
the partnership state by Greek Cypriots. From that day to this, peace and tranquillity have prevailed on the
Island. It has always been the Turkish Cypriots and Tiirkiye that have shown a sincere will to bring about a
just, permanent and sustainable solution to the Cyprus issue. The federation model has now completely lost
its validity. There are two separate states and two separate peoples on the island. The sovereign equality
and equal international status of the Turkish Cypriots, which are their inherent rights, should be reaffirmed,
and the isolation should now come to an end. Today, I once again call on the international community to
recognize the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and establish with it diplomatic, political and economic
relations.”

“We provide active support to the establishment of stability in Libya and the preservation of the unity and
integrity of the country. We call on all states to take a sincere stand by Libya during this sensitive period
and to contribute to the establishment of trust between the parties,” President Erdogan said.

Stating that we need to exert more efforts to end the conflicts in Sudan, President Erdogan said: “We all
have a responsibility to deliver humanitarian aid to millions of Sudanese displaced due to conflicts.”

“WE FURTHER STRENGTHEN OUR COOPERATION WITH THE CENTRAL ASIAN
COUNTRIES ON BILATERAL AND MULTILATERAL GROUNDS”

Highlighting Africa’s huge potential with its young and dynamic population, rich natural resources and
fertile extensive lands, President Erdogan said: “On the basis of the principles of equal partnership and
mutual respect, we support the Continent's peace, stability and development efforts with the African
peoples. We will continue to be in full solidarity with our African brothers and sisters. We are deepening
our engagement with regional organizations, such as the Indian Ocean Rim Association, the Pacific Islands
Forum and particularly ASEAN. We maintain our will to develop our relations with BRICS, which brings
together emerging economies. We share a deep-rooted history with the Central Asian countries; we further
strengthen our cooperation on bilateral and multilateral grounds.”

Noting that the Organisation of Turkic States is increasingly turning into a centre of attraction, President
Erdogan said: “The Organisation is becoming an exemplary model of cooperation, also with the
contributions of observer members Hungary and the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. As the Turkic
world, we will further strengthen our unity and solidarity.”

“WE ARE IN CLOSE DIALOGUE WITH CHINA TO PROTECT THE FUNDAMENTAL
RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS OF THE UIGHUR TURKS”

“Within the framework of respect for China's sovereignty and territorial integrity, we are in close dialogue
with China to protect the fundamental rights and freedoms of the Uighur Turks, with whom we have strong
historical, cultural and human ties. We are trying to advance the friendly ties we have established with all
the countries in Latin America and the Caribbean to a further stage,” President Erdogan said.

“WE SUPPORT THE ACTIVITIES THAT WILL ENSURE FAIR, INCLUSIVE GROWTH AND
DEVELOPMENT ON ALL INTERNATIONAL PLATFORMS”

Underscoring that we are obliged to work together to eliminate global injustice, President Erdogan said:
“The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals’ notion of “leave no one behind” is a guide for these
efforts. As one of the countries that provide the highest aid in proportion to its national income, Tiirkiye's
activities contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. We support the activities
that will ensure fair, inclusive growth and development on all international platforms, especially within the
G20.”

“We believe that all nations should benefit equally from the transformative power of emerging
technologies, including artificial intelligence,” President Erdogan said. “The United Nations Technology
Bank for the Least Developed Countries that we host is a concrete manifestation of our efforts in this
direction. The ‘cyber terrorist attacks’ perpetrated against Lebanon last week demonstrated how these
technologies can at the same time turn into a fatal weapon.”

“NO COUNTRY CAN COPE WITH THE EMISSION REDUCTION AND ADAPTATION
PROCESS TO CLIMATE CHANGE ALONE”

“We address climate change with a similar approach. No country can cope with the emission reduction and
adaptation process to climate change alone. The most important issues for developing countries are
financing, technology transfer and capacity building. I believe that the COP29 Climate Summit to be held
in Baku will contribute to the solution of these issues. With the vision of a more sustainable and cleaner
world, we have carried the Zero Waste Movement, which we launched under the auspices of my Spouse,
Mrs. Emine Erdogan, to a global level with the resolution co-sponsored by 105 countries and adopted

https://www.tccb.gov.tr/en/news/542/153688/-not-only-children-are-dying-in-gaza-the-united-nations-system-is-also-dying-

5/7
9/24/24, 4:23 PM

unanimously at the United Nations General Assembly. Hereby, I invite all countries, international
organisations and non-governmental organisations to become partners in our movement,” President
Erdogan said.

Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey : “Not only children are dying in Gaza; the United Nations system is also dying”

“HARDLY A DAY GOES BY THAT WE DO NOT WITNESS ATTACKS ON MOSQUES AND
OUR HOLY BOOK, THE HOLY QURAN”

Underlining that Islamophobia, xenophobia and racism are enveloping the world like a poison ivy,
President Erdogan said: “Hardly a day goes by that we do not witness attacks on mosques and our holy
book, the Holy Quran. In the middle of Europe, people's houses are being set on fire; their lives are being
targeted; their most fundamental rights are being usurped because of their ethnic and religious identities.
No one can ignore this growing danger any longer. As stipulated in the resolution adopted on 15 March
2024, we expect the appointment of a ‘Special Envoy for Combating Islamophobia’ at the United Nations
as soon as possible.”

“THE ATTACKS AGAINST THE FAMILY INSTITUTION, WHICH IS THE BASIC PILLAR OF
SOCIETY, ARE INTENSIFYING“

“Today I would like to draw your attention once again to a danger that I raised at this rostrum last year. The
attacks against the family institution, which is the basic pillar of society, are intensifying. The disgrace
staged at the opening of the 2024 Olympic Games has revealed the dimensions of the threat we face as
humanity. A sports event followed by innocent children and hundreds of millions of people of all ages and
faiths has been used, in a very ugly manner, for degenderization propaganda. Those wicked scenes have
deeply wounded not only the Catholic world, the Christian world, but also Muslims and everyone who
respects the sacred,” President Erdogan said.

Stating that the issue of degenderization is now turning into a global imposition rather than a ‘preference’,
literally a war against the sacred and the creation, President Erdogan said: “Anyone who raises a voice
against this destruction project and shows the slightest reaction is silenced and becomes the target of
lynching campaigns. Tiirkiye is determined to break this siege and resist this climate of fear at all cost. For
this purpose, we became a member of the United Nations Group of Friends of the Family. Insha’ Allah, we
will not hold back from defending the family, the human being and the creation in solidarity with other
member states. I invite the countries that share the same concerns with us to support this struggle.”

President Erdogan ended his speech by wishing that the 79 session of the United Nations General
Assembly will be beneficial for all humanity.

Sovial Respongzibility Projeets

ie: n2, (“A shun

sesooa hg! yeditene

Activities Contact

Recep Tayyip
Erdogan
Biography
Speeches &
Statements
Interviews
Articles

Exclusive

First Lady
Biography

Social Responsibility
Projects

Spokesperson
Projects under
Presidency's Aegis
Completed Projects
15 July

Official Website

Presidency
Presidential Cabinet
Former Presidents
Symbols of Official
Identity

Duties and Powers
Tarabya Presidential
Residence

Museum Villa

The Nation’s Library

Cumhurbaskanhgi Kiilliyesi 06560 Bestepe - Ankara
Tiirkiye Tel: 0 (312) 525 55 55 Fax: 0 (312) 525 58 31

Follow the President

Contact Info

Follow the Presidency

XO) Oia NP Oa

https://www.tccb.gov.tr/en/news/542/153688/-not-only-children-are-dying-in-gaza-the-united-nations-system-is-also-dying-

«

6/7
9/24/24, 4:23 PM Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey : “Not only children are dying in Gaza; the United Nations system is also dying”

E-mail: contact @tecb.gov.tr

https://www.tccb.gov.tr/en/news/542/153688/-not-only-children-are-dying-in-gaza-the-united-nations-system-is-also-dying- 7/7
