’\ TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO TO THE UNITED NATIONS
633 Third Avenue, 12th Floor * New York, N.Y. 10017 « Tel.: (212) 697-7620 * Fax: (212) 682-3580

STATEMENT BY
SENATOR THE HONOURABLE DR. AMERY BROWNE,
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AND CARICOM AFFAIRS OF THE REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO,
GENERAL DEBATE FOR THE 7974 SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

“Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable
development and human dignity for present and future generations.”

GENERAL ASSEMBLY HALL,
UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS, NEW YORK
28 SEPTEMBER 2024
Mr. President,

Permit me to first extend to you congratulations, on behalf of the
Government and People of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, on your
election as President of this Session of the United Nations General
Assembly. We are confident that you will be equal to the task, and I assure
you of Trinidad and Tobago’s full support and cooperation. Allow me to
also extend, on behalf of the proud People and Government of Trinidad
and Tobago, our sincerest appreciation to your predecessor and our fellow
countryman His Excellency Dennis Francis, for his astute and exemplary
leadership as President of the 78th Session, which was underpinned by the

principles of Peace, Prosperity, Progress and Sustainability.

Mr. President,

I applaud you, on your chosen theme for this 79th session, as our
global community finds itself at an inflection point that will determine the
fate of future generations. Our planet really should have been in better

shape in the year 2024. But instead, we are deeply disturbed and dismayed
by fresh divisions, the flouting of international law, gross violations of
human rights and the flourishing of illegal settkements and oppression,
which threaten peace and security around the world. Further, the alarm
bells on the climate crisis have long been sounded, and yet we race toward
a point of no return. The dream of ending persistent inequality remains a
challenge to the global community, and hard-earned progress on gender
equality appears to have stagnated in some parts of the world. It is for
these reasons, Mr President, that Trinidad and Tobago welcomed the
convening of the Summit of the Future and joined with the international
community in the adoption of the Pact for the Future. The adoption of this
Pact represents a renewal of our commitment as Member States to

Multilateralism as the best way forward.

Mr. President,

Since the dawn of civilisation, humankind has endeavoured to
become an improved version of itself in the pursuit of a better quality of
life, human rights, equality, dignity, and prosperity. Our ingenuity as

human beings has paved the way for some of the world’s greatest

2
inventions and advancements. Regrettably, in our quest to find the best
version of ourselves, we have discovered some of the worst aspects of
humanity. Our planet and its People has been subjected to misuse and
abuse, the effects of which have placed the majority of the global
population facing some version of a doomsday scenario. Now more than
ever we must summon a spirit of cooperation, and collectively put our
shoulders to the wheel for the benefit of all of humanity. We used to say
that our future depends on it, but now we have to say that our existence

depends on it.

It is very well established and accepted that there can be no
sustainable development without peace. If we fail to find credible
solutions to the global challenges, humanitarian crises, and conflicts
around the world, the international community would have squandered its
responsibility and would have perpetuated a vicious downward cycle of
regression. One example is the Russia-Ukraine war which is still ongoing
almost three years after the initial invasion, with profound implications to

the world order.
Mr. President,

Trinidad and Tobago is deeply troubled by the escalation of conflict
and tensions in the Middle East. We remain distressed by the ongoing war
on Gaza and by the chilling flashpoints of expansion that are being
deployed. Only someone absolutely bereft of humanity would think that
it is lawful and just, and even godly to respond to atrocities committed on
one awful day of terror, by in turn committing atrocities after atrocities.
How else are we to describe the killing of over two-hundred UN staff
members-the highest death toll in United Nations history, and the deaths
of tens of thousands of civilians, including women and children. And this
is not being done in secret- the entire world is watching, and the Global

South in particular is....appalled.

The question remains: if innocent civilians including women, children and
United Nations staff were being killed at this record rate in the developed
world, how would the world’s big powers have reacted. Not likely with
euphemisms and platitudes. The double standards and continued

resourcing of these ongoing violations of international law send a chilling

4
message to the Global South, and that message is this: There are some
powerful people in this world who are of the view that a Palestinian child
is less worthy of defence, protection, food, water, and life, than another
child. I am not of that view. The people of my country are not of that view.
CARICOM is not of that view. And decent people all over the world,
including in Israel are not of that view. International law is not a tool of
mere convenience to be muted for friends and trumpeted against enemies.
Mr. President, International law is not a tool of mere convenience to be

muted for our friends and trumpeted against our enemies.

In this regard, Trinidad and Tobago has joined in the call for an
immediate, full, and complete ceasefire, and for the unconditional release
of every single hostage. The truth is there is no military solution to this
conflict, as peace will only be achieved through negotiations in good faith,
and constructive dialogue among all concerned parties. Trinidad and
Tobago has consistently expressed our support for a two-state solution
where Israelis can live without the daily threat of terror and Palestinians

can live without the daily weight of occupation, co-existing side by side
as responsible members of the international community. We firmly
believe that this is the only credible pathway to end this cycle of violence
— culminating in the establishment of a sovereign and peaceful State of
Palestine alongside a sovereign and peaceful State of Israel within secure

borders.

Rooted in this belief, Trinidad and Tobago took the decision to recognize
the State of Palestine, in our contribution to the two-state solution, and in
support of the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian People for self —
determination. I can report that just six days ago, Trinidad and Tobago
and the State of Palestine officially established diplomatic relations. We
look forward to the day when the State of Palestine would be welcomed
to take its seat in the General Assembly as a full member of the United

Nations.

Mr. President,

I now turn to the issue affecting the International Criminal Court.

Despite its detractors, the evidence before us clearly shows the value and
effectiveness and necessity of the International Criminal Court. As a
country that advocated for the establishment of the ICC, via the tireless
work of our former Prime Minister and President A.N.R. Robinson,
Trinidad and Tobago remains resolute in our support of the Court’s
mandate, to help put an end to impunity for the perpetrators of the most
heinous crimes, and to provide a glimmer of hope to all victims of those
crimes seeking justice within the jurisdiction of the Court. To this end, we
continue to encourage all States that have not yet done so, to ratify and

fully implement the Rome Statute of the ICC.

It was the late Reverend Martin Luther King Jr, who once said, “It
is not possible to be in favour of justice for some people and not be in
favour of justice for all people.” For this reason, Mr. President, Trinidad
and Tobago condemns, rejects, and repudiates any and all attempts to
impede, intimidate or improperly influence the Court and its very

courageous Officials.

Mr. President,
We are very mindful that the illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons in our own region poses an intolerable threat to national
security and the lives of our citizens. The proliferation of illegal arms and
ammunition has contributed to unacceptable increases in the levels of
gun-related violence and fatalities in our small society and across
CARICOM. In addition to our own efforts domestically, we continue to
work with regional and international partners, to free our citizens from the
horrific human cost associated with the easy access to small arms and light
weapons, and their vicious use against citizens and families. Following
the hosting by Trinidad and Tobago of our first regional symposium on
Crime and Violence as a Public Health Safety Issue in 2023, CARICOM
Heads met in Guyana earlier this year, to further elaborate innovative
strategies on this matter of grave regional concern. Trinidad and Tobago
welcomes the renewed efforts of our partners including the United States
of America in particular, to work with us to help solve this deadly

challenge which respects no borders.

Mr. President,
We also remain deeply concerned by the humanitarian and security
crisis affecting the nation of Haiti. Earlier this year, from this very
rostrum, Professor Sir Hilary Beckles, Chairman of the CARICOM
Reparations Commission, stated, [and I quote] “we are calling for justice
for the people of Haiti who should have been held aloft for being the first
nation to end the evil of slavery. They should have been held aloft for
being the most noble exemplars of freedom and the celebration of
democratic possibilities in Western modernity. Instead, for their audacity
of action they were punished by the Western world and demonized rather

than deified.” [end quote].

We acknowledge that the path toward a stable and secure Haiti
requires an indigenous, Haitian-led, Haitian-owned solution that is ably
supported by the United Nations and the international community. In this
regard, we welcome the news of the appointment of an interim Prime
Minister and Cabinet. We believe that these are important steps in
confronting the political, security and humanitarian challenges in Haiti. I

salute the role of CARICOM, its Secretariat and the Eminent Persons
Group in helping the Haitians to achieve some of this progress. Trinidad
and Tobago joins in commending the Kenyan Government for its
deployment and leadership of the Multinational Security Support Mission,
and we extend our appreciation to all States that have contributed to that
operation, including Jamaica, the Bahamas and several others in our

region.

An essential component for the success of this Multinational
Security Support Mission is funding. In this regard, the Government of
the United States of America has led by example and contributed the
lion’s share, and Canada has stepped up as well. But some relatively
wealthy countries have either contributed drips and drabs or nothing at all.
We appeal to the international community to contribute the necessary

funding to support this critically important venture.

Mr. President,

10
Our quest to achieve human dignity within the context of sustainable
development, cannot be divorced from the legitimate calls for reparatory
justice for the history of chattel slavery and native genocide, in the
Caribbean and elsewhere. The brutality of our colonial experience, the
trauma of which still affects us to this day, has contributed significantly
to underdevelopment. Our fore parents were rooted out and dehumanized,
and their blood and sweat and tears and labour were extracted to build
empires, and beautiful castles, and bridges, and treasures, which some of
us pay money today to visit, and photograph and admire. Mr. President,
we have been leveraging our collective voice to call for restitution for the
historical, evil injustices and crimes against humanity committed against
our fore parents, crimes which still affect us today. In reaffirming our
commitment to this regional campaign, the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago appointed last year a reconstituted National Committee on
Reparations to provide additional energy and support to the CARICOM
Reparations Commission and its work with the African Union and other

like-minded bodies. And on a related note we wish to join with those who

11
are committed to and would welcome, the proclamation of a Second

International Decade for People of African Descent.

Mr. President,

It is indeed troubling that as we approach the thirtieth anniversary
of the Beijing Platform of Action, women and girls in some parts of this
world are still denied basic human rights and freedoms and, in some
quarters, there have been erosions of gains previously made. Trinidad and
Tobago continues to be a strong advocate for the meaningful participation
of women and girls in all aspects of society, as we recognize and value
their critical role in the promotion and protection of human rights and in

the building of peaceful and sustainable societies.

This is important to us, and as we have done biennially since the

year 2010, Trinidad and Tobago will table in the First Committee this

12
year, our resolution on Women, Disarmament, Non-proliferation and
Arms control, and we encourage Member States to support this forward-

looking resolution.

Mr. President,

The Fourth International Conference on Small Island Developing States
that was held in Antigua earlier this year, underscored the critical nature
of the next decade for SIDS. We are very proud of what our fellow
CARICOM Member State achieved in successfully hosting this impactful
conference. Trinidad and Tobago anticipates that the robust
implementation of the Antigua and Barbuda Agenda for SIDS, will bring
us closer to sustainable development, with the necessary means of support

from the international community.

Mr. President,

We all acknowledge the adverse effects of climate change. We
anticipate decisive outcomes regarding the New Collective Quantified
Goal at the upcoming COP 29 in Baku, Azerbaijan, which should catalyse

13
much-needed reform of the international financial architecture. Effective
climate finance mechanisms are essential for the provision of accessible,
adequate, and predictable funding, and this requires the operationalization
and capitalization of the loss and damage fund. Climate finance goes well
beyond project funding; it is an investment in the resilience and
sustainability of the most vulnerable nations. The future beckons, a future
in which SIDS have the capacity and resources to build infrastructure that
can withstand severe climate events. That future would enable a just
transition to renewable energy sources, and the full protection of our

natural ecosystems.

Mr. President,

Like many others, Trinidad and Tobago has long called for the
application of new multidimensional parameters for decision-making on
access to financing. In this regard, we welcome the recent adoption by the
General Assembly of the Resolution on the Multidimensional

Vulnerability Index. We encourage the international community and the

14
relevant financial and development institutions to utilize the MVI, as it

takes into account the realities that undermine sustainable development.

Mr. President,

Trinidad and Tobago stands in full solidarity with the people of
Cuba, who have been subjected to an unjust embargo for more than six
decades. This embargo severely undermines Cuba’s prospects for
attaining economic stability, growth and sustainable development.
Whatever the objectives may have been sixty-years ago, these measures
have clearly not achieved any desirable results — only the pain and
suffering of ordinary people. The collective punishment of an entire
citizenry through unilateral coercive measures is not only unconscionable,
but also inconsistent with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. Trinidad and Tobago therefore renews its call for the
unconditional lifting of the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba. Additionally, we have seen no justification for the
designation of Cuba as a state sponsor of terrorism. We call for the

removal of that unjust categorization as well.

15
So Mr. President, I conclude as I started. This world is at a point of
inflection. With tension and division rising to a crescendo, small States
have to be clear-eyed about their future. Trinidad and Tobago is small, but
we are proud of that which makes us special and unique. We may not be
a Superpower - but we have super powers, and these are our creativity and
diversity. Our cultural milieu is indescribably vibrant, as our people are
drawn from the First Peoples of our hemisphere, as well as the best of
India, the best of Africa, the best of China and yes, the best of Europe too.
We are blessed beyond measure. Some of you had a taste of it at the
Reception when we introduced our President of the last session- and you
enjoyed some of our delicacies including our delicious doubles and bake
and shark, and you were delighted by performances on our national
musical instrument the Steelpan and by the magical rhythms of our tassa
drums. We have proven that we can be great leaders, including leaders of
this very Assembly and we will continue to give more value to this world
than we extract from it. We are strong, proud, staunch advocates of the

UN system and multilateralism. In the end unity and togetherness is the

16
key... for these United Nations as well as for my own society. Om Shanti
Shanti Shanti, As-salamu Alaykum, Shalom Aleichem, and May God

bless you and your families.

Mr. President, I thank you.
