THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

STATEMENT

BY

RT. HON. ROBINAH NABBANJA,

PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT
BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT

AT

HIGH-LEVEL SEGMENT OF THE 797 SESSION OF
THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

27 SEPTEMBER 2024

Page 1 of 13

The President of the General Assembly,
Excellencies, Heads of State and Government,
The Secretary General of the United Nations,
Distinguished delegates

Mr. President,

I congratulate Your Excellency Mr. Philemon Yang, on
your election as President of the 79th Session of the UN
General Assembly and assure you of Uganda’s full
support.

I commend H.E. Mr. Dennis Francis, former President
to General Assembly, for his stewardship of the 78th
Session of the General Assembly and equally pay
tribute to the Secretary-General, H.E. Antonio
Guterres, for his commitment to the work of the United
Nations.

Mr. President,

In the face of the current global shocks occasioned by
multiple human, natural, ecological, sociological and
financial crisis, we can all agree that the World is not in
a good place.

Today, the negative consequences of disunity have
given rise to conflicts, global instability, inter-state
rivalry, and has worsened the already existing
problems of poverty, hunger, and disease in many parts
of the world.

There is therefore need to recommit ourselves to a
common identity of shared humanity in the modern
global village.

Page 2 of 13
As peoples of the United Nations, we should live by the
Charter of the United Nations with a _ sincere
determination to save future generations from the
scourge of war.

We should fully commit ourselves to upholding the
dignity and worth of human person for peaceful
coexistence and tolerance regardless of our differences
in values, cultures, race, ideologies, and religions,
without political-military threats or dominion by war.

Mr. President,

We must resolve our political commitment for the full
implementation of globally agreed frameworks for the
promotion of social - economic development and
advancement of all people.

In this regard, urgent action is required to address
global inequalities with regard to poverty, hunger and
disease which continue to affect disproportionally the
poorest and most vulnerable.

Therefore, this is the time to ask the following
questions:

e Why have we failed to forge stronger international
cooperation in response to _ collective global
challenges?

e Why is it that, in spite of the multiple global
commitments derived through consensually

formulated resolutions, decisions and
commitments, do all these remain = un-
implemented?

Page 3 of 13
This year's General Assembly, unlike all others, should
seek to answer these questions.

Mr. President,

We are all aware that most conflict drivers begin as
unresolved local or regional tensions or problems,
which become increasingly complex sometimes
involving multiple actors.

Regional conflicts must be addressed comprehensively
beyond security with the need for broad and strong
political commitments by the regional governments.
Uganda believes in the peaceful resolution of conflicts
wherever they occur.

We are at the forefront of promoting regional peace,
security and_ stability necessary for economic
development.

In this respect, Uganda encourages international
partners to support local and regional led initiatives or
solutions for building peace and_ stability as
prerequisites for sustained and inclusive economic
growth and development in our countries and regions.

We call on increased collaboration by the international
community to eliminate or reduce the incidence of
conflicts caused by factors such as inequality, climate
change, pandemics, new technologies, trans-national
organized crime and terrorism.

Page 4 of 13
Uganda believes that the benefits of this world must be
shared with all humanity and detests all forms of
exclusion by the relatively few wealth nations.

We reject the increasing competition and confrontation
between major powers, which undermines the collective
international responses to security, peace, stability and
social economic development.

Mr. President,

Uganda reiterates its call for the urgent and
comprehensive reform of the UN Security Council, for
Africa to be represented in both Permanent and Non-
Permanent categories as a special case in order to
address the historical injustice and the urgent
imperative to address it and fully supports the
Common African Position (CAP) on this matter.

The African Union Committee of Ten Heads of State (C-
10), under the leadership of the Republic of Sierra
Leone, has been pursuing the mandate to promote,
advocate and canvass for support of the Common
African Position (CAP) on the reform of the United
Nations Security Council as stipulated in the Ezulwini
Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.

The position is that, Africa should have two Permanent
Seats with a veto if others have it and two additional
Non-Permanent Seats on the Security Council.

The Committee of Ten (C-10), since 2005, has been
driven with the hope and conviction of sovereign
equality in representation and participation in Inter-
governmental negotiations for the reform of the UN
Security Council, to make it more responsive to current

Page 5 of 13
circumstances, achieve a future of shared goals for
humanity.

The core aspiration is for Africa to get representation in
the United Nations Security Council as equal partners,
and make a contribution to a multilateral system that
should become inclusive, equitable, and work for the
international peace and security of all, without
paralysis or succumbing to parochial interests of major
powers.

Mr. President,

We demand for the right to development as equal
members of the international community without any
preconditions or politicization for greater human
dignity, freedom, social economic justice.

We call for fair access to means of production,
technology and capital for the social economic
transformation of our economies in line with our
national legal frameworks and development plans.

Uganda believes that the perpetual preservation of
poverty and inequalities in developing countries
undermines the fundamental human rights, in
particular the rights of the marginalized and poor, and
remains a threat to international peace and security,
which should no longer be overlooked.

Uganda as chair of the Non-Aligned Movement will
work with countries of the Non-Aligned Movement as
well as other countries on the inter-governmental
processes that shall lead to the adoption of the UN
Covenant on the Right to Development.

Page 6 of 13
Mr. President,

Financing remains one of the greatest challenges that
undermine the efforts of developing countries to fully
implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and achievement of its 17 Sustainable
Development Goals.

Borrowing is critical for financing investments in
sustainable development.

Sovereign debt is an important tool for financing
sustainable development, enabling low-income
countries to invest in infrastructure, health, education,
and other critical areas.

We emphasize that loans to low-income developing
countries should be concessional and at zero interest
rate.

This will enable our countries to finance productive
investments, including building infrastructure to
improve connectivity, make debt sustainable in the
long-run and spur economic growth which will in turn
help to improve domestic tax collection and raise
revenues.

Uganda like other developing countries faces
constraints of domestic resource mobilization due to
limited tax base.

We call for strengthening of the international
cooperation in tax matters to ensure that it is effective
and inclusive by making Multi-National Cooperations
pay taxes in countries of their operations, including
collections of revenue generated by e-commerce in
cross border transactions.

Page 7 of 13
We fully support the ongoing discussions on adoption
of the UN Framework Convention on International Tax
Cooperation and call upon all countries to negotiate
constructively.

We also call for the strengthening of international
cooperation in the prevention of and combating illicit
financial flows with a view of ensuring that all illicit
funds or resources including assets are returned to
their countries of origin.

Furthermore, Uganda calls for the urgent reform of the
international financial architecture, including the
international financial institutions and their rules to
ensure equitable representation of developing countries
in international economic governance decision making
that affect the trajectory of their national development.

Mr. President,

Uganda identified four key sectors of wealth and job
creation in line with its national development plan, that
include; agro-processing, industrialization, services,
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs),
digitization and skills development to support our
socio-economic transformation.

There is no doubt that affordable energy and access to
affordable high-quality internet connectivity is vital to
catalyze their full implementation in order to realize
inclusive development outcomes and benefits for our
people.

We need to strengthen deeper collaboration with the
global South with the support of our partners in the
North, to unlock shared prosperity by building the

Page 8 of 13
necessary infrastructure and connectivity to increase
productive capacity for rapid growth, economic take-off
and sustainable development.

In this regard, Uganda calls on the international
community to support the full implementation of the
African continental free trade area (AfCFTA).

Furthermore, Uganda calls on the _ international
community to support its path to sustainable
development. We encourage foreign individuals and
companies to invest in the country.

We welcome inflows of money, technology, knowledge,
skills and expertise as major sources of non-debt
financial resources for the economic development of
our country.

Uganda also calls for collaboration by the international
community in medical research for global health to
develop vaccines and treatments to combat diseases
like Ebola, Covid19, Monkey-pox and improving
healthcare capability in low-income countries
particularly in Africa.

Uganda advocates for mutually beneficial trade and
investment.

We encourage that in pursuing’ sustainable
development Foreign Direct investments should be
geared to adding value by processing raw materials
inside our country where raw materials are produced
and to export high value products.

This will create jobs, generate high incomes and
increased taxable revenues. We call on Multi-national
Companies (MNCs) to desist from purchasing raw

Page 9 of 13
materials and only selling processed products for
consumption in developing countries.

We equally call on developed economies and Multi-
national Companies (MNCs) that buy raw materials to
process them and add value in their countries should
take measures to institute policies that allow sharing
the profits they generate in the value chain, with the
low-income raw material producing countries where it
is sourced, for shared prosperity.

Mr. President,

Climate change remains one of the greatest challenges
to the pursuit of sustainable development.

Uganda calls on developed countries to provide the
necessary financial, technological as well as capacity
building to support developing countries to effectively
address climate change.

We demand for climate justice, recognizing that richer
countries, having historically profited from  high-
emission activities for the development of their
economies and bear a greater obligation to lead in
mitigating these impacts.

Therefore, the high-income countries should reduce
their emissions and equally support developing
countries in their gradual transition to low-emission
development pathways, without using the environment
as a political and economic tool to block or slow down
their development.

We emphasize that climate finance should be additional
to official development assistance.

Page 10 of 13
Mr. President,

Developing countries face great challenges, including
the increase in unilateral political, economic and trade
actions or policies and the weakening of
multilateralism, which are flagrant violations of the
principles established in the UN Charter, international
law, and the purposes of the United Nations.

We consider that it is urgent to stop these actions that
threaten the economic and social development of the
countries that are subject to them and, consequently,
prevent them from _ achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).

Uganda reiterates its call to put an end to the
economic, commercial, and financial blockade imposed
on those sisterly nations under sanctions, which is a
major impediment to their sustainable development.

Uganda also reiterates its firm rejection to the
imposition of laws and regulations with extra-
territorial impact and all other forms of coercive
measures, including unilateral sanctions, against
developing countries and reiterates the urgent need to
eliminate them immediately.

Mr. President,

Uganda took over the Chairmanship of both the Group
of 77 and China, and Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) in
January 2024.

I take this opportunity on behalf of H.E Yoweri Kaguta
Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda to thank
all member states of the Group and the Movement, for

Page 11 of 13
their confidence in entrusting Uganda in the capacity of
Chair.

We commend the Africa Group for endorsing our
candidature for the chairmanship of both
Organizations. This year, 2024, has been a crucial year
with various intergovernmental processes at the United
Nations on issues that are of paramount importance to
both the Group and the Movement.

These include, inter-alia, Fourth international
conference for the Small Island Developing States,
Third UN Conference on the Land-locked Developing
Countries; Summit of the Future; Preparations for the
4th Fourth International Conference on Financing for
Development; 2024 UN Climate Change Conference
(COP29), all of which demand that we remain even
more united and steadfast in promoting the interests of
developing Countries.

Uganda, therefore, commends the members of both
groups for keeping united in solidarity as we pursue
the issues of our common interests.

In conclusion, Uganda will continue with this
stewardship working together in solidarity to achieve a
revitalized multilateral system which is capable of
adequately addressing current and emerging global
challenges.

We firmly believe that multilateralism remains a
fundamental and crucial mechanism for addressing our
common challenges namely;

1.Acceleration of the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development;

Page 12 of 13
2.Scaling up action to address climate change and
biodiversity loss;

3. Strengthening international tax cooperation;

4.Availing adequate concessional financing for
development;

5. Fight against illicit financial flows and enhancing
global collaboration in digital and _ artificial
technologies to maximize the benefits to society
and minimize harm, among others.

I thank you.
For God and My Country

Nabbanja Robinah
PRIME MINISTER

Page 13 of 13
