SPEECH BY H.E. BAKHTIYOR SAIDOV, MINISTER OF FOREIGN
AFFAIRS OF UZBEKISTAN, AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 797 OF
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

(25 September 2024)

Dear Mr. President,
Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

First of all, allow me to convey greetings and best wishes of peace
and prosperity from the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan,
H.E. Shavkat Mirziyoyev to the United Nations leadership, heads of
state, and delegations participating at the 79th Session of the General
Assembly.

Let me also express my sincere gratitude for the opportunity to
address this esteemed assembly.

I would like to thank the UN Secretary General Mr. Antonio Guterres
for
his firm focus on Central Asia. This was once again confirmed by his
recent visit to our region, which laid a solid foundation for further
expanding cooperation with the United Nations.

Our debates are taking place at a time of escalating global
challenges.

Wars and conflicts, triple planetary climate crisis, worsening of the
world economy and technological gap are affecting all countries
without exception.

We firmly believe that the United Nations must remain central

in addressing the challenges of the 21st century.
OK 28 36 26 26 2K 2 2 26 26 26 2K 2K 2k

Resolving global issues at the national level is crucial for maintaining
stability and the well-being and prosperity of our people.

In this context, achieving the Sustainable Development Goals is
very important.

The consistent implementation of the SDGs has been identified by
the President of our country as the cornerstone of Uzbekistan's state
policy.
2
Our "Uzbekistan - 2030" Development Strategy is fully aligned
with SDGs.

In recent years, Uzbekistan has made significant progress in
poverty reduction, improving public access to education, transitioning to
a green economy, and promoting gender equality.

Our GDP has more than doubled, and the poverty rate has fallen
almost
4 times in less than 10 years. We are taking solid steps to create jobs and
improve the quality of human capital with the aim to reduce
the unemployment rate from 11% to 7%.

Full-scale implementation of the SDGs is impossible without
attracting investments and advanced technologies. Uzbekistan is
actively pursuing these goals, leveraging our state resources and private
sector.

However, many developing countries face challenges in accessing
global financial resources.

We share the view to reform the international financial system
to establish a modern financial architecture.
OK 28 36 26 26 2K 2 2 26 26 26 2K 2K 2k

Humanity's future is closely linked to the development and
application
of modern technologies.

New scientific advancements should bring people and nations
closer together, not separate them.

We proceed from the principle that access to technology is not a
privilege, but a right for every person and every nation.

Digital technologies are especially crucial. We have adopted the
"Digital Uzbekistan - 2030" Strategy. We are rapidly advancing our IT
sector.

Yet, there is another side of the coin. Rise of the digital technologies
presents new challenges, particularly concerning the uncontrolled use
of artificial intelligence.

Based on this idea, at the previous session, Uzbekistan supported
and
co-sponsored UN General Assembly resolutions on utilizing safe
3
artificial intelligence for sustainable development and_strengthening
international cooperation.

We will continue to advocate for broad international collaboration
to address these issues.
2h 6 2K 2 KK 2k 6 OK KK KKK

Last year was one of the hottest in the history of meteorological
observations. We have witnessed record-breaking heat and extreme
cold conditions worldwide.

This once again proves the growing urgency of the climate change
problem.

Central Asia is among the most exposed and vulnerable regions of
the world to climate change.

The air temperature in Central Asia is rising faster than the global
average.

This creates a wide range of problems, which pose serious risks to
food
and energy security.

Thus, the level of water availability per capita in Central Asia has
halved over the past few decades (from 3,500 cubic meters to 1,630).

The Aral Sea disaster continues to have an extremely negative
impact
on the ecosystems of all states in the region.

We call on the international donor community to expand projects
in the Aral Sea region aimed at mitigating the devastating consequences
of this disaster.

The Aral Sea became the first region in the world to be granted by the
UN the status of a Zone of Environmental Innovation and Technology.

Our best experience could benefit other countries facing similar
problems.

Central Asian countries are unified on climate action.

Last December, at the initiative of the President of Uzbekistan,
the General Assembly by consensus adopted the resolution "Central Asia
in the face of environmental problems: strengthening regional solidarity
for sustainable development and prosperity."

4
We also developed a Regional Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
and established a Climate Council to create a national climate change
program.

At the same time, we are aware of the need for broad international
cooperation to effectively overcome these challenges.

In this regard, we propose to adopt the UN resolution "International
Year of Land Restoration and Increasing Drought Resistance."
OK 28 36 26 26 2K 2 2 26 26 26 2K 2K 2k

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Our updated Constitution sets ambitious goals for building a welfare
state.

Uzbekistan is committed to enhancing social protection, improving
service quality, and implementing international standards.

For this purpose, we have established the Social Protection Agency.
We plan to hold the World Conference on "Social Protection" in 2025.
We invite all UN Member States to this important event.

OK 28 36 26 26 2K 2 2 26 26 26 2K 2K 2k

Empowering women and girls is a key component of our state
policy.

Uzbekistan has made notable progress in ensuring gender equality,
ranking among the top five countries in this regard.

The Asian Women's Forum held in Samarkand in partnership with
UN-Women has become a crucial platform for dialogue on gender
policy issues.

We propose expanding this forum to a Global Women's Forum and
adopting the UN resolution on enhancing the social, economic and
political activities of Asian women.

OK 28 36 26 26 2K 2 2 26 26 26 2K 2K 2k

Youth represents our common future.

In Uzbekistan, where over half of the population is under 30, effective
youth policy is vital to build a New Uzbekistan.
5
We are a global leader in implementing the UN Youth Strategy
2030.

However, the rising radicalization and increased violence involving
youth is alarming.

We must focus on fostering proper spiritual and moral education of
young people to prevent their involvement in radical movements.

We propose enhanced cooperation in this direction based on
the UN General Assembly resolution "Enlightenment _and_ Religious
Tolerance" adopted at the initiative of our President in 2018.

OK 28 36 26 26 2K 2 2 26 26 26 2K 2K 2k

The global threat of terrorism requires unified international action.

In the fight against this evil, there should be no place for selective
approaches and double standards.

The Central Asian states maintain close cooperation in ensuring
regional security.

Together with the UN Counter-Terrorism Office we have successfully
launched the Regional Expert Council in Central Asia on Rehabilitation
and Reintegration.

We appreciate the UN's assistance in developing the National
Strategy
of Uzbekistan _to Combat Drug Trafficking and Drug Abuse for 2024-
2028.

38 6 OK 8 RB RK OB KB KB KK

As a State Party to the United Nations Convention against
Corruption, Uzbekistan welcomes anti-corruption efforts.

We support enhancing the role of the UN in fostering international
cooperation against corruption.

In December last year, together with the State of Qatar and support
of the UNODC, we have hosted the High-level International Anti-
Corruption Award ceremony in Tashkent.

OK 28 36 26 26 2K 2 2 26 26 26 2K 2K 2k

In recent years, our country has become an active participant of all
UN processes.
6
For the first time in our history, we have joined the UN Human
Rights Committee, ECOSOC, and the Governing Body of the International
Labour Organization.

In 2025, we will host the 43rd session of the UNESCO General
Conference
in Samarkand - an event that will be held outside of Paris for the first
time since 1985.

We invite all UNESCO member states to actively participate in this
event.

We have decided to run for the non-permanent membership of the
UN Security Council for the 2035-2036 terms.

We count on your support of our candidacy.
OK 28 36 26 26 2K 2 2 26 26 26 2K 2K 2k
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen,
Central Asia remains top priority in Uzbekistan's foreign policy.

The new political atmosphere in Central Asia allowed us to address
many global issues regionally.

We will continue to consolidate our efforts to transform the region
into
a zone of lasting peace, good-neighborliness, stability, and dynamic
development.

38 6 OK 8 RB RK OB KB KB KK

Our region remains one of the least integrated economies in the
world
in terms of its transport and communication networks.

Due to the geographical location of the Central Asia, the cost of
transporting goods to the nearest seaports can reach up to 50% of the
final value, which
is four to five times higher than the global average.

Today, our region is firmly focused on connecting to major global
markets and revitalizing the Great Silk Road. Uzbekistan is taking
strong steps
to establish effective transport corridors leading to international
markets.
7
We are implementing an ambitious project to build the Trans-
Afghan railway, which will provide access to global ports and have a
positive effect
on the economic development of our vast region.
OK 28 36 26 26 2K 2 2 26 26 26 2K 2K 2k

The key to ensuring stability and sustainable development in our
region lies in addressing the Afghan problem.
Afghanistan is an integral part of Central Asia.

Unfortunately, the international community has been unable to
implement measures capable of reversing the challenging situation in
this country.

Uzbekistan is pursuing a pragmatic policy towards Afghanistan.

We will continue to contribute to Afghanistan’s economic
reconstruction and the development of its transport and energy
infrastructure.

We are ready to expand the Educational center for Afghan citizens in
the Uzbek city of Termez into the Global training center.

Recently, we have established the Termez International Trade
Center, designed to foster a favorable business environment and
enhance logistics.

In order to achieve stability, it is crucial to uphold the UN’s central
role
in resolving the Afghan issue and developing coordinated strategies to
ensure sustainable development.

Your Excellencies,

In conclusion, I would like to once again emphasize that the
challenges and threats we face today can only be addressed through
comprehensive international efforts.

Uzbekistan remains committed to actively participating in shaping
the agenda for multilateral cooperation, achieving common goals, and
supporting measures to reinforce the central role of the United Nations.

Thank you for your attention.
