Address by His Eminence Cardinal Pietro Parolin
Secretary of State of the Holy See
at the General Debate of the
79" Session of the United Nations General Assembly
New York, 28 September 2024

Leaving no one behind: acting together for the advancement of peace, sustainable
development and human dignity for present and future generations.

Mr. President,

I am honoured to extend to you and to the distinguished representatives of the
Nations assembled here the warm greetings of His Holiness Pope Francis, while also
congratulating Your Excellency on your election as President of this esteemed
Assembly.

This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the Holy See’s presence as an
Observer at the United Nations. Over the course of its uninterrupted tenure, the Holy
See has advanced a set of core principles, including the respect for the inherent God-
given human dignity of all individuals, the equal sovereignty of states, the pursuit of
peace and disarmament, and the care of our common home.

Mr. President,

The Holy See is deeply concerned that at this particular point in time, we are
witnessing a worrying increase in the number of conflicts worldwide and the severity
of their violence. These conflicts are responsible for a significant loss of innocent life
and a vast amount of destruction, which presents a challenge in accurately assessing
the extent of the damage caused to civilian infrastructure, including places of worship,
educational institutions and medical facilities, as well as the impact on the
environment.

It seems that seventy-five years after the ratification of the Geneva Conventions,
humanitarian law is still being undermined. These four conventions, which set out clear
rules to protect people who are not taking part in hostilities, are increasingly being
violated. It is evident that the targeting of places of worship, educational institutions,

1
medical facilities, and other civil infrastructure is a prevalent phenomenon. This has
resulted in not only the loss of life among those who are not directly involved in the
conflict but also an unacceptable disruption to the daily lives of many. On this point
Pope Francis is very clear that “we must not forget that grave violations of international
humanitarian law are war crimes, and that it is not sufficient to point them out, but also
necessary to prevent them. Consequently, there is a need for greater effort on the part
of the international community to defend and implement humanitarian law, which
seems to be the only way to ensure the defence of human dignity in situations of
warfare.”! The Holy See calls for the strict observance of international humanitarian
law in all armed conflicts, with particular attention to the protection of places of
worship.

However, the situation becomes more complex when one considers the
prominent and destabilising role often played by violent non-state actors in many of
the crises around the globe. It is estimated that there are over four hundred fifty armed
groups that present a security concern on a global scale. Violent non-state actors control
areas in which one hundred and ninety-five million people reside, with 64 million of
these individuals living in areas that are completely under the control of the groups in
question.’ It is imperative that violent non-state actors seek constructive engagement
with States, renounce violence and acts of terrorism and enter into legality. Conversely
States, must always bear in mind that such groups are so called not only because they
cannot be configured under international humanitarian law, but also precisely because
they operate under a cloak of illegality. It is therefore the responsibility of states to
address the underlying causes of the formation of such groups, primarily through the
promotion of human rights and the advancement of the rule of law.

As Pope Francis affirms, “The need for peace challenges us all, and demands
that concrete steps be taken.”? Peace is only possible if it is wanted. The establishment
of peace is contingent upon the existence of a collective desire for its realisation. The
pursuit of peace is a collective responsibility. It is imperative to move beyond rhetoric
and the tendency to ascribe blame. Indeed, it is always possible to attribute
responsibility to a State, an international organisation or a lack of reform; however, the
reality is that there is no genuine commitment to achieving peace.

In times of conflict, there is often a tendency to prioritise military victory over
the pursuit of peace. This inevitably result in dynamic unwarranted escalations and
casualties, particularly of innocent individuals. It is thus incumbent upon diplomacy to

' Pope Francis, Address to the members of the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See, 8 January 2024.
2 ICRC statistics, https://blogs.icrc.org/law-and-policy/2023/10/10/icre-engagement-with-armed-groups-in-2023/ .
3 Pope Francis, Spes non confundit, 8.

2
demonstrate unwavering dedication to pursuing, with fortitude and ingenuity, every
avenue for negotiation with the objective of establishing enduring peace.

“To pursue peace, however, it is not enough simply to eliminate the instruments
of war; its root causes must be eradicated. Foremost among these is hunger, a scourge
that continues to afflict entire areas of our world while others are marked by massive
waste of food.”4 The global population is predominantly poor, with billions of
individuals living below the poverty line. While poverty is increasingly discussed in
international political and economic fora, it often appears to be addressed as an
afterthought, as an add-on or tangential issue, or even as a mere collateral damage.
Consequently, the plight of the poor remains largely unaddressed, and they frequently
remain at the bottom of the socio-economic ladder. As I said during the Summit of the
Future “eradication of poverty must remain the overarching goal of all future action,
bearing in mind that development is the name for peace.”*

Nevertheless, the prevailing tendency over recent years has been to maintain the
growth in military expenditure, while simultaneously striving to fulfil the commitments
made in relation to sustainable development in a timely manner. This is indicative of a
deficit of trust between States.

It is thus that Pope Francis appeals to rich Countries to “acknowledge the gravity
of so many of their past decisions and determine to forgive the debts of Countries that
will never be able to repay them. More than a question of generosity, this is a matter of
justice. It is made all the more serious today by a new form of injustice which we
increasingly recognize, namely, that a true ‘ecological debt’ exists, particularly
between the global North and South, connected to commercial imbalances with effects
on the environment and the disproportionate use of natural resources by certain
countries over long periods of time.”°

It is regrettable that this lack of trust has a negative impact on those in the most
vulnerable situations, particularly the poor and the needy, despite the numerous
initiatives, meetings and conferences that have been held to address the issue of the
eradication of poverty. “Let us not forget: the poor are almost always the victims, not
the ones to blame.”

It is easy to become complacent and resigned in the face of the constant stream
of new forms of poverty. However, these dramatic situations can be encountered all
around us, not only in certain parts of the world. This is the case for example of the

4 Pope Francis, Address to the Members of the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See, 8 January 2024.
5 Cardinal Pietro Parolin, Statement at the Summit of the Future, 24 September 2024.

© Pope Francis, Spes non confundit, 16.

7 Tbid., 15.
modern phenomenon of homelessness. These people often do not have enough to eat
for the day, or a safe shelter for the night.

There is indeed a need to look towards the future we want to leave for the new
generations. This means to start acting now especially by taking care of those who
could be easily left behind, these need to be given new hope. Poverty has a particularly
detrimental impact on women, often trapping them in a vicious cycle of unfortunate
circumstances, resulting in isolation and abandonment before they are forced to make
desperate and unwelcome decisions.

It is thus that the life of the human being needs to be protected from the moment
of conception to that of natural death. The lack of this is one of the greatest poverties
of our era. As Pope Francis says “the path to peace calls for respect for life, for every
human life, starting with the life of the unborn child in the mother’s womb, which
cannot be suppressed or turned into an object of trafficking.”® In this regard, the
practice of so-called surrogate motherhood is deplorable, representing a grave violation
of the dignity of both the woman and the child, based on the exploitation of situations
of the mother’s material needs. A child is always a gift and never the basis of a
commercial contract. Consequently, the Holy See hopes for an effort by the
international community to prohibit this practice universally. Moreover, in order to
promote women’s equal dignity with men and to protect them from any oppressive
practices, it is of the utmost importance to preserve all those traditional values which
highlight the beauty of their being women, which flourishes in motherhood, in mutual
reciprocity in family life, as well as in their free and equal participation in social,
economic and political life.

The hope for a better future lies in “working for a future filled with the laughter
of babies and children, in order to fill the empty cradles in so many parts of our world,”?
and to recover the joy of living. A better quality of life should also be given to the sick,
and as I said during the High-Level Meeting on Antimicrobial Resistance there is a
need to “promote policies and resources needed to each person’s fundamental right to
basic and decent healthcare.””'® In this regard special attention should be given to the
elderly and those affected by illnesses or disabilities that restrict their personal
independence and freedom. Human life must be protected and defended at every
moment of its existence. It is, however, a cause for concern that, particularly in the

8 Pope Francis, Address to the Members of the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See, 8 January 2024.

8 Cardinal Pietro Parolin, Statement at the Summit of the Future, 24 September 2024.

° Pope Francis, Spes non confundit, 9.

‘0 Cardinal Pietro Parolin, Statement at the High-Level Meeting on Antimicrobial Resistance, 26 September 2024.
4
West, there is a continued spread of a culture of death, which, in the name of false
compassion, discards children, the elderly and the sick.

The dignity of migrants who leave their homeland behind in search of a better
life for themselves and their families must be upheld. People seeking refuge must not
be rejected or treated unfairly but welcomed with respect and a sense of responsibility
to ensure their right to live with dignity. Those forced to leave their homes due to war,
violence or discrimination must be given access to security, work and education to help
them settle in their new Country.

Furthermore, another affront to human dignity is trafficking in human beings.
The exploitation and subjugation of individuals restrict their freedom and transform
them into objects to be used and discarded. The trafficking system exploits the
injustices and inequalities that force millions of people to live in vulnerable conditions.
Trafficking is growing at an alarming rate, affecting mainly refugees and migrants,
women and children, young people, and individuals who are full of dreams and the
desire to live with dignity. This illegal and, above all, dehumanising practice must be
stopped and the traffickers brought to justice, while hope and dignity must be given
back to their victims.

This hope should be given to those who experience hardships of any kind.
Dignity must be given to prisoners, starting from the providing with dignified prisons,
and “forms of amnesty or pardon meant to help individuals regain confidence in
themselves and in society; and programmes of reintegration in the community,
including a concrete commitment to respect for law.”!!

Closely related to the dignity of human life is the care for our common home.
The effects of climate change are borne by those in the most vulnerable situations. As
I underscored during the High-Level Meeting to Address Existential Threats Posed by
Sea Level Rise, it is a shared “duty to care for the world and the quality of life of the
poorest, with a sense of solidarity which is at the same time aware that we live in a
common home which God has entrusted to us.”!? It is indeed the poorest countries,
who contribute the least to climate change, but are those who carry the greatest burden
of its effects, including the rising of sea-levels.

There is a pressing need for “a healthy ecology [which] is also the result of
interaction between human beings and the environment, as occurs in the indigenous
cultures and has occurred for centuries in different regions of the earth.”!? The care for

'! Pope Francis, Spes non confundit, 9.

” Cardinal Pietro Parolin, Statement at the High-Level Meeting to Address Existential Threats Posed by Sea Level
Rise, 25 September 2024.

'3 Pope Francis, Laudate Deum, 27.
our common home necessitates that the commitments taken over the years to combat
climate change are translated into action.

Opportunities and risks are also given by the rise of new technologies,
particularly artificial intelligence. “It is precisely this powerful technological progress
that makes artificial intelligence at the same time an exciting and fearsome tool, and
demands a reflection that is up to the challenge it presents.”!*

This technological advancement coincides with a growing societal divide over
pivotal social issues. Even within communities with a shared cultural heritage, there is
often a divergence of opinion, making it challenging to identify solutions that are both
equitable and satisfactory. In addition to the emergence of disparate perspectives within
society, there appears to be a decline in the understanding of what it truly means to be
human, accompanied by a reduction in the significance attributed to human dignity. It
seems that the value of the human person is being eroded. Not to mention the times
when the human person is being substituted by a machine working on an algorithm.
There is a need to ensure and safeguard a space for proper human control over choices
made by artificial intelligence.

It is precisely in this regard, that Pope Francis insists that “in light of the tragedy
that is armed conflict, it is urgent to reconsider the development and use of devices like
the so-called ‘lethal autonomous weapons’ and ultimately ban their use. This starts
from an effective and concrete commitment to introduce ever greater and proper human
control. No machine should ever choose to take the life of a human being.”>

There is an urgent need for a comprehensive ethical reflection involving all
States on the utilization of emerging technologies, particularly within the military
domain. There is a necessity for the establishment of a binding ethical and regulatory
framework to be negotiated, both within the non-military and military domains.
Nevertheless, the Holy See maintains that the ethical and humanitarian implications of
lethal autonomous weapons are of paramount concern and reiterates the urgent need
for a moratorium on their use.

Peace is an indivisible concept, and in order for it to be both just and lasting, it
must be universal in scope. It is fallacious and self-defeating to assume that the security
and peace of a particular group is unrelated to the collective security and peace of
others. The Holy See is convinced that a world free from nuclear weapons is both
necessary and possible. In a system of collective security, the presence of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction is untenable. As I said during the

'4 Pope Francis, Address to the G7 Session on Artificial Intelligence, 14 June 2024
'S Thid.

6
High-Level Meeting to Commemorate the International Day for the Total Elimination
of Nuclear Weapons “the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons can only be achieved
through discussions based on mutual trust. [The Holy See] will continue to build
bridges of dialogue with every State, with the aim of safeguarding the common good
rather than individual interests.”

Moreover, it is evident that existing disarmament treaties are not merely legal
obligations; they encompass a broader range of considerations. Indeed, they constitute
moral commitments based on trust among States and among their representatives. This
trust is itself rooted in the trust that citizens place in their governments. The adherence
to and respect for international disarmament agreements and international law should
not be perceived as a form of weakness. Conversely, it serves as a source of strength
and responsibility, as it fosters trust and stability. It is thus that the Holy See renews its
call for a total and complete disarmament and “to devote to the benefit of developing
nations at least a part of the money that could be saved through a reduction of
armaments.”?”

Unfortunately, as Pope Francis says, we are witnessing a third world war fought
piecemeal. In the midst of the ongoing tragedy of the Russian war in Ukraine, we are
faced with a situation that calls for urgent action to prevent further escalation and to
create a path towards a just and peaceful resolution. While diplomatic efforts are
crucial, it is evident that military engagement continues to prevail. It is, therefore,
essential to find ways to encourage gestures of goodwill and spaces for direct dialogue
between the parties involved.

The Holy See continues to be worried about the ongoing instability in the Middle
East, particularly following the terrorist attack of 7 October 2023 in Israel by Hamas
and other armed Palestinian groups. However, the military response by Israel,
considering the high number of civilian casualties, raises many questions about its
proportionality. The Holy See calls for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, the West Bank,
as well as the release of Israeli hostages in Gaza. It is also urging for humanitarian
assistance to be granted to the Palestinian population. The Holy See strongly condemns
attacks on UN humanitarian agencies, specifically UNRWA, and urges all parties to
refrain from using humanitarian aid for military or political purposes. The Holy See
reaffirms that the only viable solution is a two-state solution with Jerusalem having a
special status. It also emphasizes that both sides must abandon all forms of violence,
coercion, and unilateral actions, such as Israeli settlements in Palestinian territories.

'6 Cardinal Pietro Parolin, Statement at the High-Level Meeting to Commemorate the International Day for the Total

Elimination of Nuclear Weapons, 26 September 2024.
'T Pope Paul VI, Address to the United Nations Organization, 4 October 1965.
7
The Holy See expresses serious concern regarding the situation in Jerusalem,
where several discriminations and harassments are taking place hindering the peaceful
co-existence for Christians, Jews, and Muslims. It condemns all anti-Christian acts
perpetrated months ago by a minority of Jewish individuals and calls on the authorities
to continue confronting this ideological deviation firmly and clearly. The presence of
Christians in Jerusalem must be protected and attempts to diminish their presence must
be unequivocally condemned, and that no administrative tactics be used to threaten the
Christian presence.

The current situation in Lebanon represents a significant cause for concern for
the Holy See. The ongoing intensification of the conflict between Hezbollah and the
Israeli military is having a considerable impact on the situation in southern Lebanon
and northern Israel, putting at high risk the whole region. This has resulted in a
significant number of displaced individuals and a considerable loss of life, including
many civilians, among them children. The Holy See therefore demands that all parties
adhere to the principles of international humanitarian law and halt the escalation and
enter into a ceasefire without delay. The failure to elect a President of Lebanon has
resulted in a state of inertia, leaving the country susceptible to partisan agendas. The
necessity for a robust Christian voice to steer the nation through this unparalleled crisis
is paramount. The Holy See is convinced that Lebanon plays a pivotal role in
maintaining regional stability and urges all stakeholders to support the country and
safeguard its message of peaceful coexistence.

Furthermore, the Holy See highlights the humanitarian crisis in Syria and urges
the international community to do more in supporting the Syrian people, who feel
hopeless about their future. The Holy See wishes to see new approaches to the Syrian
question that take into account the impact of economic sanctions on the population,
and provide relief to the affected population while also ensuring justice for past events.

The ongoing blood shedding armed conflict in Sudan has resulted in an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis, with displaced persons, particularly women and
children, succumbing to starvation and malnutrition. Famine has now been officially
confirmed in the North Darfur region. Unfortunately, the assistance offered by
international donors has so far been insufficient and below expectations. Therefore, the
Holy See urges the international community not to forget the ongoing drama in Sudan,
to promote peace negotiations and, above all, to immediately provide the population
with vital humanitarian aid.

Cabo Delgado Province in Mozambique has been affected by armed conflict for
seven years now, with almost nine hundred fifty thousand internally displaced persons

(IDPs) who are facing significant challenges, including alarming levels of suffering,
8
insecurity and poverty. While these refugees experience a sense of uprooting from the
lands of their ancestors, the situation of children without food or schooling is a cause
for apprehension. The Holy See calls for more Humanitarian support, especially to
reduce the impact on children and innocent civilians.

The situation in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo is
deteriorating rapidly, leading to a disturbing increase in the humanitarian crisis. Ethnic
tensions, rebel violence, armed clashes, human rights abuses, and conflicts over natural
resources are prevalent in the provinces of Ituri, North Kivu, and South Kivu. The
withdrawal of the United Nations Organisation Stabilisation Mission in the DRC
(MONUSCO) by the end of the year, along with the already initiated process, is likely
to create a security vacuum. The peace processes in Nairobi and Luanda have lost their
relevance and attention. The Holy See deems that it is crucial to continue supporting
diplomatic efforts to find an appropriate and sustainable solution to the ongoing
conflict.

The Holy See also follows with great preoccupation the socio-political situation
in South Sudan, aggravated by the humanitarian crisis, the recent floods and the
conflict in Sudan. It therefore calls on the international community to show renewed
and urgent solidarity with the population, already exhausted by economic hardship, and
urges all the country's leaders to place the well-being of the people at the centre of the
political agenda. At the same time, it hopes that the ongoing dialogue initiatives will
lead, with the goodwill of all, to peaceful coexistence and the consolidation of
democracy.

The spread of jihadist threats in the Gulf of Guinea is causing concern for the
security of not just the Sahel, but all of West Africa. Christians are being targeted,
while climate change and armed attacks are worsening the food crisis and causing
children to drop out of school. Immediate and long-term action is needed to prevent a
loss of education and stability in the region.

The Holy See is following the dramatic situation in Haiti with apprehension, and
hopes that the steps that are being taken, with the support of the international
community, to establish democratic order and stop the violence will lead to peace and
reconciliation in the Country.

The dramatic situation and the dire need for humanitarian aid in Myanmar, which
has been exacerbated by an increase in armed conflict in recent months and made worse
by severe flooding, are also a source of deep concern for the Holy See. While armed
groups and military forces continue to battle back and forth for territory, those who
suffer the most are: the young who are deprived of education, the elderly who are

9
forced to flee their homes, the Rohingya who are targeted from all sides and have no
place to turn. The Holy See calls on all parties to seek durable, inclusive and peaceful
solutions to the situation, and to ensure access for humanitarian aid to all affected
communities without prejudice.

The Holy See follows with great attention to what is happening in Nicaragua and
is particularly concerned about the measures taken against personnel and institutions
of the Church, which directly affect the sensitive issue of religious freedom. It is hoped
that, in conjunction with the other fundamental rights of individuals and society, this
freedom will be adequately guaranteed. For its part, the Holy See is open to respectful
and constructive dialogue with the authorities of the country, with a view to resolving
difficulties and promoting peace, fraternity and harmony for the benefit of all.

The recent presidential elections in Venezuela have demonstrated that, despite
the numerous challenges faced, the Venezuelan people continue to place their trust in
the democratic values enshrined in the Constitution. These democratic values are
founded upon the sovereignty of the people, which is expressed through the act of
voting. In the serious crisis that followed the announcement of the results, with several
deaths, numerous detentions — also of minors — and the use of violence, the Holy See,
deeply saddened and worried, appeals to the authorities of the country and to all those
who have any responsibility for what has happened, to respect and protect the life,
dignity, human rights and fundamental freedoms of its citizens. Furthermore, it calls
upon them to seek ways to resolve the present situation, for the good of all, including
with the assistance of members of the international community who have declared
themselves willing to help, in a flexible and reasonable manner.

The Holy See encourages the talks between Armenia and Azerbaijan so that,
with the support of the international community, they may continue the dialogue, assist
the displaced persons, respect the places of worship of the different religious
denominations and reach a final peace treaty between the parties as soon as possible.

The Holy See looks also favourably on the aspiration of the Balkan countries to
join the European Union, and hopes that this objective will be achieved as soon as
possible, to alleviate also the feeling of abandonment that troubles its citizens. It is
important that ethnic, cultural and confessional differences are not a cause of division
but become a source of richness for the whole of Europe and for the whole world.

While disarmament fosters peace among Nations, there is also a need to foster
peace within societies. An instrument of this could be democracy. Democracy is not
simply a matter of formal observation of a set of rules. Rather, it is the result of a
considered and committed acceptance of the values that inspire democratic procedures.

10
These values include the dignity of every human person, the respect of human rights
and a commitment to the common good as the purpose and guiding criterion for
political life. Without a general consensus on these values, it may be challenging to
embrace fully the deeper meaning of democracy and ensure its stability.

The establishment of democracy is contingent upon the existence of a state
apparatus that is governed by the rule of law and a sound understanding of the human
person. For such a system to flourish, it is essential that the requisite conditions be in
place to facilitate the advancement of both the individual through the provision of
quality education and the formation of genuine ideals, and the collective subjectivity
of society through the creation of structures that facilitate participation and shared
responsibility. In this sense Pope Francis warned that “participation cannot be
improvised: it is learned from childhood, and young people must be ‘trained’ even to
develop a critical sense regarding ideological and populist temptations.” !®

Nevertheless, democracy may manifest in a multitude of forms, yet it is
invariably founded upon the tenets of freedom of expression. In a democratic society,
it is not only opinions that may diverge; rather, a plurality of views is essential.
However, these should be accompanied by mutual respect and understanding. It thus
follows that the right to freedom of speech must always upheld, without neglecting the
freedom of religion or belief.

A further fundamental principle of democracy is the respect for the will of the
people. This implies that changes in the holders of power and in the leadership of a
Country can occur in accordance with the fundamental laws and principles of that
Country. However, there is cause for concern that there is an increasing tendency to
alter constitutions or to modify electoral rules and procedures for the purpose of
remaining in power or of preventing those who have been legitimately elected by the
people from assuming power. Democracy entails respect for the established rules, a
commitment to pursue the collective good of the Country and its people, and a
recognition of their expressed will.

As evidenced by historical precedent, a democracy that lacks a clearly defined
set of values is susceptible to becoming an open or covert totalitarian regime.
Democracy is, in essence, a system that serves a purpose, rather than being an end in
itself. The moral value of democracy is not an inherent attribute; rather, it is contingent
upon conformity to the moral law, to which it, like all other forms of human behaviour,
must be subject. In other words, the morality of democracy is contingent upon the
morality of the ends it pursues and the means it employs.

'8 Pope Francis, Address on the occasion of the 50" Social Week of Italian Catholics, 7 July 2024.
11
Pope Francis made it clear that “the path to peace calls for respect for human
rights, in accordance with the simple yet clear formulation contained in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights [...]. These principles are self-evident and commonly
accepted. Regrettably, in recent decades attempts have been made to introduce new
rights that are neither fully consistent with those originally defined nor always
acceptable. They have led to instances of ideological colonization, in which gender
theory plays a central role; the latter is extremely dangerous since it cancels differences
in its claim to make everyone equal. These instances of ideological colonization prove
injurious and create divisions between states, rather than fostering peace.”!? They do
not even help to ensure the necessary harmony between women and men, which
requires the recognition of the reality and beauty of their complementarity and
reciprocity, as well as the gift of welcoming life. In this regard, it is also inconceivable
to associate the concept of “right” with the practice of abortion, which involves the
taking of an innocent life. Instead, from a human rights perspective, it is necessary to
acknowledge the right of the woman to find concrete and moral support when she is in
a situation of distress, loneliness and abandonment during her pregnancy and in the
post-natal period.

The Holy See is profoundly alarmed that some of the most common violations
of human rights occur in the area of religious freedom. It seems that the international
community faces significant challenges in defending religious freedom, which is the
litmus test for all other rights and freedoms. The Holy See always emphasises the
importance of recognising the public dimension of religious freedom, while also
respecting the legitimate autonomy and secularity of the State built on a healthy
dialogue between the State and religious communities, which are not rivals but
partners. Dialogue is necessary to respect the principles of authentic pluralism and
build true democracy, whether on the national or international level.

It is a matter of concern that, according to some estimates, almost 4.9 billion
people live in countries where there are serious or very serious violations of religious
freedom. It is estimated that at least seven out of every ten citizens worldwide are
currently prevented or harmed in the exercise of their rights in matters of conscience.
It is worthy of note that Christians are the most vulnerable in this regard.
Approximately one in seven Christians (over 365 million individuals) are subjected to
significant levels of persecution on the grounds of their religious beliefs. The number
of attacks on churches and Christian properties has risen markedly in 2023, with a
greater number of Christians than ever before suffering violent attacks. Similarly,

'° Pope Francis, Address to the Members of the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See, 8 January 2024.
12
numerous Christians are being deprived of their right to conscientious objection and to
freedom of expression and peaceful protest.

Furthermore, it is important to emphasise the importance of the institutional
aspect of religious freedom, which entails the right of each religious denomination to
freely organise itself in accordance with its governing statutes.

Mr. President,

In order to relaunch a shared commitment to the service of peace, there is a need
to recover the roots, the spirit and the values that gave rise to this organization, while
at the same time taking into account the changed context and showing regard for those
who do not feel adequately represented by its structures.

The first, and most necessary reform needed is the return to a sincere and open
dialogue which is the “soul of the international community. The current situation is
also the result of the weakening of structures of multilateral diplomacy that arose after
the Second World War. Organizations established to foster security, peace and
cooperation are no longer capable of uniting all their members around one table. There
is the risk of a ‘monadology’ and of splitting into ‘clubs’ that only admit states deemed
ideologically compatible. Even agencies devoted to the common good and to technical
questions, which have thus far proved effective, risk paralysis due to ideological
polarization and exploitation by individual states.””°

It is evident that without dialogue and an open exchange of perspectives, even
when there is disagreement, consensus and agreement cannot be reached. Instead, there
is a risk of a select few imposing their ideas and policies on others. In other words,
there is a need to go back to basics, to the spirit which inspired the founding members
of this Organisation, that is a forum of open dialogue and exchange of ideas in order to
leave a better and more peaceful world.

The Holy See, as it has done in these last six decades, continues to support the
work of the United Nations, making its voice heard in defence of the poor, of those in
vulnerable situations, supporting every peace process and initiative.

Thank you, Mr. President.

20 Pope Francis, Address to the Members of the Diplomatic Corps accredited to the Holy See, 8 January 2024.
13
