Permanent Mission of Zambia to the United Nations, 237 East 52nd Street, New York, NY 10022
Tex: (212) 888-5770 Fax: (212) 888-5213 E-mail: zambia@un.int

Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY
HON. MULAMBO HAIMBE, SC, MP,
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
AT THE

HIGH-LEVEL SEGMENT OF THE
7914 SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

New York
28h September, 2024

e YOUR EXCELLENCY PHILEMON YANG, PRESIDENT OF THE 7974
SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY;

e THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS, ANTONIO
GUTERRES;

e DISTINGUISHED HEADS OF STATE AND GOVERNMENT;

e HONOURABLE MINISTERS;

e HEADS OF INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND OTHER ORGANISATIONS;

e EXCELLENCIES;

e DISTINGUISHED LADIES AND GENTLEMEN.

| congratulate you, Your Excellency on assumption of the Presidency
of the 79th Session of the United Nations General Assembly and assure
you of Zambia's cooperation during your tenure.

We extend Zambia's sincere gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Dennis
Francis for the exemplary work exhibited during the 78! Session.

Mr. President,

The theme for this session, ‘“Leaving no one behind: Acting together
for the advancement of peace, sustainable development and human
dignity for present and future generations" presents an opportunity for
us to re-examine our priorities, redefine our mission, and sharpen our
vision as we approach the 80th Anniversary of the United Nations.

Zambia, therefore, joins the UN Secretary General in congratulating
Member States for successfully adopting the Pact for the Future which
includes the Global Digital Compact and the Declaration on Future
Generations. We further appreciate the work of Namibia and
Germany for co-facilitating this process. It is our hope that the
implementation of the Pact for the Future will address the multiple
crises facing the World today.

Mr. President,

Zambia firmly believes that multilateralism is the only viable approach
to solving regional and international challenges. In this regard, the
creation of the United Nations almost 80 years ago provided new
hope for the international community in the maintenance of
international peace and security, promotion of justice and
improvement of living conditions for all people. However, this ideal is
rapidly slipping away as global peace is increasingly threatened by
the growing and sustained geopolitical tensions.

As Member States that share in the ideals upon which the United
Nations was founded, we must resolve to correct this course and
uphold the principles enshrined in the UN Charter.

The impact of conflict in some parts of the world has been felt across
Africa through disruptions, soaring prices of key commodities such as
energy and other inputs of trade and production, resulting in
increased cost of living. Zambia like many other developing countries
which are predominantly import-dependent, has not been spared. It
is therefore, crucial that we address the root causes and structural
drivers of conflict and promote peacebuilding efforts.

Mr. President,

At regional level, Zambia held the chairmanship of Southern African
Development Community (SADC) Organ on Politics, Defence and
Security Cooperation for the period August 2023 to August 2024 and
therefore, played a crucial role in the region in that capacity.

Overall, the security and political situation in the region remains stable.
However, there are still pockets of security challenges in some of our
Member States such as the situation in the eastern parts of the
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and Cabo Delgado Province
in Mozambique which SADC remains seized with.

We implore the international community to support the various
peacebuilding efforts in the DRC. We further call for support to the
Government of Mozambique in order to ensure that the exit of the
SADC Mission in Mozambique (SAMIM), does not result in reversal of
the gains made by the Mission.

Furthermore, Zambia recognises the efforts of His Excellency Mr. Jodo
Manuel Lourenco, President of the Republic of Angola as the African
Union Mediator in the facilitation of the Luanda process aimed at
restoring Peace and Security in the Eastern DRC as well as the Nairobi
Process that equally aims at fostering peace in the DRC.

Mr. President,

Climate Change and extreme weather conditions threaten the very
existence and balance of the world as we knowit. It is clear that efforts
to raise the standard of living for the world’s poor are being adversely
affected by the effects of Climate Change. For instance, this year,
Zambia experienced the worst drought in recent times. This led the
Government to declare the drought as a national disaster and
emergency to save lives and safeguard livelinood.

The drought has adversely affected water-dependent sectors such as
agriculture and energy. Equally, household incomes, nutrition, human
health and the environment have been adversely affected.
Furthermore, reduced agricultural productivity and low hydroelectric
power generation have consequently slowed down our economic
growth. This year, about fifty percent of Zambia's population was at
risk of food insecurity.

We take this opportunity to thank all our bilateral and multilateral
partners who graciously responded to the clarion call to support
Zambia's Drought Response Strategy.

This, and similar scenarios in our region, underscore the need to build
local resilience and climate adaptation through various interventions
including, among others, climate financing from both public and
private sources. In this regard, the need for the full actualisation of the
Loss and Damage Fund to help developing countries cope with
climate related disasters and extreme weather events cannot be
overemphasized. We urge Member States to focus their energies on
achieving measurable outcomes at the forthcoming COP29
accordingly.

Mr. President,

It is becoming increasingly apparent that the SDGs may not be met
by 2030 as only 17 percent of the SDGs targets are on track, while the
remaining 83 percent are either stagnated or regressing. Therefore,
Zambia joins calls for massive investment and scaled-up action in
order to close the financing gap which is currently estinated to
be around $4 trillion. Failure to close this gap will adversely impact
future generations.

In the same vein, we call on the International Community to scale up
financing for developing countries to achieve the SDGs, including
honouring commitments to contribute at least 0.7 percent of Gross
National Income towards Official Development Assistance.

Further, the heavy burden of debt in some developing countries
presents another major hurdle to the attainment of the SDGs

4
especially in Africa. These countries face a high risk of debt distress.
There is need, therefore, for an effective debt workout mechanism
that supports payment suspensions, longer lending terms, and lower
interest rates.

Based on Zambia's experience, we call for further reforms to
streamline the existing G-20 Framework for Debt Restructuring in order
to enhance certainty and reduce the time it takes to conclude the
process.

Zambia further joins calls for the reform of the international financial
architecture to make it fit-for-ouroose and equitably address the
development needs of all countries in the 21s century.

Additionally, there is need to build capacities for Least Developed
Countries (LDCs) to access other innovative financing measures such
as debt-for-climate swaps and green and blue bonds, among others.

Mr. President,

Aggressive tax avoidance and tax evasion have a corrosive effect on
public trust, financial integrity, the rule of law and _ sustainable
development across the globe. International tax cooperation could
significantly reduce illicit financial flows, a scourge that deprives
economies, especially those in the developing world, of critical
funding for development. Zambia, therefore, calls for the urgent
conclusion of negotiations on the proposed UN Framework
Convention on International Tax Cooperation. This will enable
developing countries enhance their domestic resource mobilization.

As co-facilitator of the negotiations of the Outcome Document for the
Fourth International Conference on Financing for Development in the
coming months, we look forward to actively engaging with Member
States in the reform of the international architecture.
Mr President,

Science and technology are critical to achieving the SDGs.
Developing countries’ lack of access to technology has hindered the
implementation of sustainable development practices, thus
perpetuating the cycle of poverty and inequality.

Hence, there is need to bridge the gap in digital technologies
including Artificial Intelligence, to promote efficiencies in health,
climate, sustainable infrastructure, energy, agriculture and other
global development priorities.

In this regard, we call for enhanced international cooperation to
support developing countries to integrate technology through
capacity building, technology transfer on mutually agreed terms,
information exchange and _ investments in research and
development.

Alongside the Pact of the Future, Member states adopted a Global
Digital Compact. Zambia was honoured to partner with Sweden in
leading negotiations of this historic document.

The Compact at its core, is designed to close the digital gap, protect
human tights online, respond to the rapidly advancing artificial
intelligence and create a more inclusive governance framework on
digital matters. It is also meant to accelerate efforts towards achieving
SDGs. However, it can only deliver its potential if we step forward to
implement its commitments.

Mr. President,

As part of its efforts to accelerate the attainment of the SDGs by 2030,
Zambia has been implementing policies and programmes aimed at
creating a strong and resilient health system, reducing inequalities,
eradicating poverty, and empowering women and girls. This is also
consistent with the implementation of the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD) Programme of Action.

Zambia welcomes the declaration on Future Generations which seeks
to secure the well-being of future generations, in particular their
participation in decision making.

To reap the demographic dividend, Zambia continues to call for
significant investments in the growing youth population, currently
standing at 82% below the age of 35. Increased investments are
needed in education, health and empowerment of young people so
that they can meaningfully contribute to the achievement of SDGs.

Mr. President,

Child, early and forced marriage is a harmful practice that
disproportionately affects girls, hindering their education, health, and
overall well-being.

In this regard, Zambia continues to make strides in the campaign to
end Child Marriage by 2030 and safeguard the rights of girls by
enacting relevant legislation to address this vice.

President Hakainde Hichilema being the African Union Champion on
Ending Child Marriage, Zambia is pleased to report that the campaign
is growing from strength to strength, with 32 of the 54 countries on the
continent having launched national campaigns to end child
marriage. However, much more needs to be done. We call on all
partners to join efforts and raise our voices to protect our children to
end this harmful practice by 2030.

This year marks the 10!h Anniversary since the adoption of the General
Assembly Resolution on Ending Child, Early and Forced Marriage co-
facilitated by Zambia and Canada. As in previous sessions, we Count
on support of all delegations during the negotiations of this very
important Resolution.

Mr. President,

Zambia is committed to the promotion and protection of human rights
in order to ensure that all persons can have full and equal enjoyment
of the rights enshrined in the Constitution and international human
rights instruments Zambia is a party to.

Further, Zambia remains resolute in ensuring that the core principles of
human rights such as universality, equality and non-discrimination are
upheld. In this regard, Zambia is pleased to indicate its intention to
present its candidature for membership to the Human Rights Council
for the term 2026 to 2028 during the elections to be held in 2025.

Mr. President,

In the face of the present geopolitical realities and calls to strengthen
multilateralism, the need to reform the UN Security Council cannot be
over emphasized. Reforms are necessary to make the Security
Council better equipped and strengthened in its capacity to
discharge its responsibilities of maintaining and safeguarding
international peace and security.

The representation of African States in the Permanent Category would
correct the historical injustice that has marginalized Africa’s voice;
and will provide a vital perspective to the Council.

Time has come for the Security Council to be representative,
democratic and accountable to all Member States, irrespective of
status. This is essential for its integrity as the custodian of international
peace. Given that Africa constitutes the second largest bloc of the

8
UN membership, proposals to reform the Security Council should heed
Africa's call as espoused in the Common Africa Position as enshrined
in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.

In this regard, we are pleased to note that the African Union
Committee of Ten(C-10) and the five Permanent Members (P-5) of the
United Nations Security Council had a meeting during this session of
the United Nations General Assembly. Such interactions should be
encouraged in order to narrow the gap on the Security Council
reforms.

Mr. President

Finally, | wish to reaffirm that Zambia remains committed to
strengthened multilateralism as a means of addressing the numerous
global challenges affecting our people including ending poverty and
creating wealth in a sustainable manner. To this end, Mr. President, we
should not remain indecisive and indifferent to this serious issue, nor
should we forego this opportunity to make the world a better place
for all humanity.

In conclusion, | would like to reiterate the need for us to seriously
consider the call for massive investment and scaled-up action if we
are to make meaningful progress in achieving the SDGs, including
implementation of the Pact for the Future.

| thank you Mr. President.
